  
 
 
 
 
 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW  
DIVISION – SOUTH LOS ANGELES 
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
 
 
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
 UNITEDHEALTHCARE COMMUNITY PLAN  
OF CALIFORNIA INC.  
 
2022 
 
Contract Number:  
  
17-94404 
 
Audit Period: 
 
 
 
Dates of Audit: 
 
 
 
Report Issued: 
 June 1, 2021 
    Through 
May 31, 2022 
 
September 19, 2022  
    Through 
September 23, 2022  
 
March 14, 2023 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ .............1 
 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ .2 
 
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  ................................ ......................4 
 
IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care ................................ ..5 
 Category 4 – Member’s Rights ................................ ........................7 
  
 
 
 1 of 10 I. INTRODUCTION  
 
 
UnitedHealth Group Inc., is a publicly traded company incorporated in 1977 , which 
operates on two business platforms. Health care coverage and benefit s services are 
provided under the UnitedHealthcare branch, and information and technology -enabled 
health services are provided under Optum branch.   
 
UnitedHealthcare provides services to an array of customers in different markets under 
various companies. Un itedHealthcare Community and State is the segment that 
manages healthcare benefit programs for Medicaid across the United States.  
UnitedHealthcare Community Plan of California Inc. (Plan), which incorporated in March 
2013, is the California segment for Me di-Cal. 
 
The Plan obtained its Knox -Keene Health Care Service Plan license in October 2014 
and contracted with the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) in October 2017 
as a Geographic Managed Care (GMC) p lan to provide health care services to Medi -Cal 
beneficiaries in the GMC counties of Sacramento and San Diego.  
 
The Plan terminated its Medi -Cal contract in Sacramento County at the end of October 
2018. Also, the Plan is closing its Medi -Cal line of business in San Diego County on  
December 31, 2022. The Plan will continue to serve its Dual Eligible Special Needs 
Plan (D-SNP) members under a State Medicaid Agency Contract with DHCS . 
As of August 2022, the Plan’s total membership in San Diego County was 31,196 for 
Medi-Cal and 4,346 for D-SNP. 
 
  
 2 of 10 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
 
This report presents the audit findings of the DHCS medical audit for the period of  
June 1, 2021 through May 31, 2022. The audit was conducted from September 19, 
2022 through September 23, 2022 . The audit consisted of document review, verification 
studies, and interviews with Plan personnel.  
 
An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on February 14, 2023. The Plan was allowed 
15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental 
information addressing the draft audit report findings.  No additional information w as 
submitted after the Exit Conference.  
 
The audit evaluated four categories of performance: Utilization Management, Access 
and Availability, Member’s Rights, and Quality Management. 
 
The prior DHCS medical audit for the period of June 1, 2019 through May 31 , 2021 was 
issued on November 22, 2021 . This audit examined the Plan’s compliance with its 
DHCS Contract and assessed implementation of its prior year’s Corrective Actio n Plan. 
 
The summary of the findings by category follows:  
 
Category 1 – Utilization Management  
 
No findings were noted for the audit period.  
 
Category 3 – Access and Availability  
 
Category 3 includes requirement s to provide Non-Emergency Medical Transportation 
(NEMT) and Non -Medical Transportation (NMT) for members.  
 
The Plan is required to have a completed  Physician Certification Statement  (PCS) form 
from the member’s provider for NEMT services.  The Plan did not ensure that a PCS 
form was utilized for NEMT services . 
 
Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 
Category 4 includes requirements to establish and maintain a grievance system.  
 
The Plan is required to  aggregate and analyze grievance d ata, on a quarterly basis for 
quality improvement . Grievance data shall include access to care, quality of care, and 
denial of services and  appropriate action shall be taken to remedy any problems 
identified. The Plan did not document remediation for the identified grievances related t o 
access to specialists and Primary Care Providers (PCP) appointments, and balance 
billing. 
 
 3 of 10 The written record of grievances shall be reviewed periodically by the governing body , 
the public policy body, and by an o fficer of the Plan or designee.  The Plan’s governing 
body and public policy body did not review the written record of grievances on a periodic 
basis. 
 
The Plan is required to provide subscribers and members with the written response to 
grievances, with a clear and concise explanation of the reason for the Plan’s decision. 
The Plan did not send grievance resolution letters with a clear and concise explanation 
of its decision to members.  
 
Category 5 – Quality Management  
 
No findings were noted for the audit period.  
 
  
 4 of 10  
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  
 
 
SCOPE 
 
The DHCS Contract and Enrollment Review Division conducted the audit to ascertain 
that the medical services provided to the Plan members complied with federal and state 
laws, Medi-Cal regulations and  guidelines, and the Contract.  
 
PROCEDURE 
 
The audit was conducted  from September 19, 2022 through September 23, 2022. The 
audit included a review of th e Plan’s Contract , policies for providing services, the 
procedures used to implement  the policies, and verification studies of the 
implementation and effectiveness of those policies. D ocuments were reviewed and 
interviews conducted with the Plan administrators and staff.  
 
The following verification studies were conducted :   
 
Category 1 – Utilization Management  
 
Prior authorization requests: 19 medical prior authorization  requests were reviewed for 
timeliness, consistent application of criteria, appropriate review, and communication of 
results to members and providers.  
 
Category 3 – Access and Availability  
 
NEMT:  20 NEMT member records and one NEMT grievance record w ere reviewed for 
compliance with N EMT requirements. 
 
NMT:  20 NMT member records and four NMT gri evance records were reviewed for  
compliance with NMT requirements.  
 
Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 
Grievances: A total of 126 grievances (ten quality of care, 61 quality of service, 47 
exempt and eight expedited) were reviewed for timely resolution, response to 
complainants, and submission to the appropriate level of review and medical decision -
making. 
 
A description of the find ings for each category is contained in the following report.  
 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF) 
 
PLAN:  UnitedHealthcare Community Plan of California Inc.  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  June 1, 2021 through May 31, 2022 
DATES OF AUDIT:  September 19, 2022 through September 23, 2022  
 
 5 of 10  
CATEGORY 3 – ACCESS AND AVAILABILITY  OF CARE 
 
 
3.8  
NON-EMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION  
NON-MEDICALTRANSPORTATION  
 
3.8.1 Physician Certification Statement Form 
 
The Plan is required to cover NEMT services required by members to access Medi -Cal 
services, as provided for in California Code of Regulations ( CCR), Title 22, section 
51323, subject to the PCS form being completed by the member’s provider. (Contract, 
Amendment A01, Exhibit A, Attachment 10 (8)(H)(2 )) 
 
Plans must use a DHCS approved PCS form to determine the appropriate level of 
service for Medi-Cal members. Once the member’s treating physician prescribes the 
form of transportation, the Plan cannot mo dify the authorization. In order to ensure 
consistency amongst all Plans, all NEMT PCS forms must include, at a minimum: 
function limitations justification, dates of service needed, mode of transportation 
needed, and certification statement . (All Plan Letter (APL) 17-010, NEMT and NMT 
Services) 
 
The Plan Policy and Procedures: CA OPS 130 Transportation Services  (Effective: 
12/01/2021), stated that PCS forms are required for NEMT services. The PCS forms are 
to be used by the transportation vendor to obtain the mode of transportation from the 
treating physician to authorize NEMT services and standing orders prior to rendering 
services.  
 
Finding:  The Plan did not ensure that a PCS form was utilized for NEMT services . 
 
The Plan’s Policy and Procedures  CA OPS 130 included the requirement for the 
vendors to utilize the PCS form with authorization from the treating physician prior to 
rendering services; however, the Plan did not follow its procedures to ensure that NEMT 
files contained the PCS form for NEMT rendered services. 
 
A review of 20 NEMT trips provided to members revealed that 16 were missing the 
required PCS form.  
 
During the interview , the Plan stated that the transportation vendor was responsible to 
utilize the PCS form  with approvals from the treating physician . The Plan did not ensure 
that its transportation vendor included the PCS form in  the file. The Plan did not follow 
its procedures and the Contract requirements . 
 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF) 
 
PLAN:  UnitedHealthcare Community Plan of California Inc.  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  June 1, 2021 through May 31, 2022 
DATES OF AUDIT:  September 19, 2022 through September 23, 2022  
 
 6 of 10 Without obtaining PCS forms for NEMT trips, the Plan is unable to determine the 
appropriate level of service for Medi -Cal members. 
 
This is a repeat of prior year finding 3.8.1  Physician Certification Statement Form 
Requirement. 
 
Recommendation:  Implement policy and procedures to ensure that a PCS form is 
utilized when rendering NEMT services.   
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF) 
 
PLAN:  UnitedHealthcare Community Plan of California Inc.  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  June 1, 2021 through May 31, 2022 
DATES OF AUDIT:  September 19, 2022 through September 23, 2022  
 
 7 of 10  
CATEGORY 4 – MEMBER’S RIGHTS  
 
 
4.1  
GRIEVANCE SYSTEM  
 
4.1.1 Appropriate Action to Remedy Grievance Issues 
 
The Plan is required to compile the systematic aggregation and analysis of grievance 
and appeal data and use for Quality Improvement (QI). (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 
14 (1) (J)) 
 
The Plan is required to submit the written record of Grievances and Appeals (G&A) at 
least quarterly to the Plan’s quality assurance committee for systematic aggregation and 
analysis for QI. G&As reviewed must include, but not limited to, those related to access 
to care, quality of care, and denial of services. The Plan must take appropriate action to 
remedy any problems identified. (APL 21-011 which superseded 17 -006, Grievance and 
Appeal Requirement s, Notice and “Your Rights” Template s)  
 
Finding: The Plan did not document remediation for  the identified grievances related to 
access to specialists and PCP appointments, and balance billing.  
 
The Plan’s Policy and Procedures undated CAOPS126:  Member Appeal Grievance 
Policy Fair Hearing and Independent Medical Review Policy,  stated the grievance and 
appeal system was monitored by the Chief Executive Officer/Chief Operation Officer 
(CEO/COO) and Chief Medical Officer (CMO) in monthly meeting. The Plan would take 
appropriate action to remedy problems ident ified related to grievances. However, it did 
not document remediation for the identified grievances in accordance with its  
procedures and the APL requirements. 
  
A review of G&A Reports for the 2021 quarter three and quarter four listed the following 
number of grievances:  
● 252 in quarter three 2021 (64 billing and 24 access to services grievances) 
● 323 in quarter four 2021 (49 billing an d 44 access to services  grievances) 
 
Furthermore, appeal and grievance reports identified problem areas ; however, there 
was no documentation to remedy these issues.  The Service Quality Improvement 
Subcommittee Meeting Minutes review did not document the discussion of the identified 
issues and interventions to remediate  the problems identified.  
  
During the interview, the Plan stated that it performed remediation through Joint 
Operations Committee meetings, disciplinary action , and provider education .  
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF) 
 
PLAN:  UnitedHealthcare Community Plan of California Inc.  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  June 1, 2021 through May 31, 2022 
DATES OF AUDIT:  September 19, 2022 through September 23, 2022  
 
 8 of 10 However, documentation provided did not include how the Plan remediat ed the 
identified grievance issues.  
 
Lack of appropriate action to remedy identified grievance issues may prevent the Plan 
from improving systemic issues, which may have a detrimental effec t on members’ 
quality of care. 
 
This is a repeat of prior year finding 4.1.1 Appropriate Action to Remedy Identified 
Grievance Problems . 
 
Recommendation:  Revise and implement policy and proced ures to ensure appropriate 
actions are taken to remedy identified grievance s issues. 
 
 
4.1.2 Review of Written Grievance Log  
 
The Plan is required to comply with all existing final Policy Letters (PLs)  and APLs 
issued by DHCS. (Contract, Exhibit E, Attachment 2)  
 
The written record of grievances shall be reviewed periodically by the governing body of 
the Plan, the public policy body created pursuant to section 1300.69, and by an officer 
of the Plan or his designee. This review shall be thoroughly documented. (CCR, Title 
28, section 1300.68 (b)(5))  
 
The grievance and appeal system is required to operate in accordance with all 
applicable federal regulations, state laws, and state regu lations. The written record of 
G&A is required to be reviewed periodically by the governing body of the Plan, the  
public policy body, and by an o fficer of the Plan or designee. The review is required to 
be thoroughly documented . (APL 21-011 which superseded APL 17 -006: G&A 
Requirements, Notice and “Your Rights” Templates)   
 
Finding: The Plan’s governing body and public policy body  did not review the written 
record of grievances on a periodic basis . 
 
The Plan’s Policy and Procedure  undated CAOPS126 : Member Appeal Grievance 
Policy State Fair Hearing and Independent Medical Review Policy , stated that the 
written record of G&As must be reviewed periodically by the Plan Board of Directors, 
the public policy body and by the CMO or CEO/COO. The review must be thoroughly 
documented. However, the Plan did not provide documentation  to support the review of 
the written record of grievances  was conducted by the governing body, and the public 
policy body committees  during the audit period .  
 
 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF) 
 
PLAN:  UnitedHealthcare Community Plan of California Inc.  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  June 1, 2021 through May 31, 2022 
DATES OF AUDIT:  September 19, 2022 through September 23, 2022  
 
 9 of 10 During the interview the Plan stated the review of the written record for grievances on a 
periodic basis by the governing body , and public policy body has not been implemented 
yet by the Plan. Only the officer of the Plan reviewed the written record.  
 
When the written record of grievances is not reviewed by the governing body  and public 
policy body, this may result in missed opportunities to improve quality of the grievance 
process. 
 
This is a repeat of prior year finding 4.1.2 Review of the Written Record of 
Grievances. 
 
Recommendation:  Develop and implement policy and procedure s to ensure periodic 
review of the written record of grievances is conducted by the governing body and 
public policy body . 
 
 
4.1.3 Grievance Resolution Letter Decisions  
 
The Plan is required to develop, implement, and maintain a Member Grievance System 
in accordance with CCR, Title 28, sections 1300.68, and 1300.68.01  and CCR, Title 22, 
section 53858. (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 14 (1)).  
 
The Plan is required to establish and maintain written procedures for the submittal, 
processing, and res olution of all member grievance s and complaints. The Plan’s 
grievance procedure shall at minimum provide for a description of the action taken by 
the Plan or provider to investigate and resolve the grievance and the proposed 
resolution by the Plan or provider. ( CCR, Title 22, section 538 58 (a)) 
 
The Plan is required to provide subscribers and members with written responses to 
grievances, with a clear and concise explanation of the reason for the Plan’s response. 
The Plan’s response shall describe the criteria used and clinical reasons for  its decision 
including all criteria and clinical reasons related to medical necessity. ( Health and 
Safety Code, section 1368 (5))  
 
The Plan’s written resolution letter shall contain a clear and concise explanation of the 
Plan’s decision. (APL 21-011 which superseded APL 17 -006: G&A Requirements, 
Notice and “Your Rights” Template s) 
 
Finding: The Plan did not send grievance resolution letters with a clear and concise 
explanation of its decisions to members .  
 
The Plan’s undated Policy and Procedure s CAOPS126: Member Appeal Grievance 
Policy State Fair Hearing and Independent Medical Review Policy , stated written 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF) 
 
PLAN:  UnitedHealthcare Community Plan of California Inc.  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  June 1, 2021 through May 31, 2022 
DATES OF AUDIT:  September 19, 2022 through September 23, 2022  
 
 10 of 10 grievance decision are issued within applicable regulatory timeframe requirements, and 
must include the following elements if applicable: A clear and concise explanation of the 
disposition APL 17 -006. However, the Plan staff did not follow its  procedures when 
sending resolution letter  to members’. 
 
A review of 61 standard gr ievance files revealed that 18 g rievance resolution letters did 
not have a clear and concise explanation of the decision; for example, the letters 
included the following statements:  
● We are unable to share o ur findings due to certain laws , 
● State and/or federal laws prevent the result o f this review from being 
communicated back to you , or 
●  No decision statement was written on the letter to address the member’s 
     complaint. 
 
During the interview, the Plan acknowledged that the existing language in grievance 
resolution letters was not appropriate in all  cases and did not always address the 
member’s concerns . 
 
Without a clear and concise written explanation of the Plan’s decisions, members are 
not made aware if their issues are addressed and resolved. 
 
Recommendation:  Develop and implement a process to ensure that grievance 
resolution letters include a clear and concise explanation of the Plan’s decision.  
 
