  
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES 
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION 
 SACRAMENTO SECTION 
 
 
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF 
HEALTH PLAN OF SAN JOAQUIN 
 
2023 
 
Contract Number:  
  
04-35401 
 
Audit Period:  
 
 
 
Dates of Audit:  
 
 
 
Report Issued:  
 October 1, 2022 
    Through 
July 31, 2023 
 
October 30, 2023 
    Through 
November 10, 2023 
 
April 9, 2024 
 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION .............................................................................1 
 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................2 
 
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES ......................................................4 
 
IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
 Category 1 – Utilization Management ..............................................5 
 Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care ............9 
 Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity ............. 12 
 
 1 of 13 
 I. INTRODUCTION  
 
 
The Health Plan of San Joaquin (Plan) is a non-profit corporation headquartered in 
French Camp, California and established in 1995. In 1996, the Plan received its Knox-
Keene license and contracted with the State of California to provide health care services 
to Medi-Cal members in San Joaquin County. 
 
On January 12, 1995, the State of California contracted with the San Joaquin County 
Board of Supervisors to serve as the Local Initiative under the Two-Plan Model, 
pursuant to the California Welfare and Institutions Code, section 14087.31. On January 
1, 2013, the Plan began to serve as the Stanislaus Local Initiative. The San Joaquin 
County Health Commission governs the Plan through an 11-member commission 
consisting of local government members, clinical, and non-clinical community 
representatives. In June 2018 and June 2021 the Plan was awarded the National 
Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) accreditation renewal. 
 
Health care services are provided through contracts with independent medical groups 
and individual physicians (1,000 plus network providers and specialists). Health care 
services not provided directly by primary care physicians are arranged through 
contracts with other medical groups/physicians, allied health service suppliers, and 
hospitals. As of August 2023, the Plan had 457,053 Medi-Cal members. The Plan’s 
Medi-Cal market share is about 89.4 percent in San Joaquin County and 70.8 percent in 
Stanislaus County. 
 
  
 2 of 13 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
This report presents the audit findings of the Department of Health Care Services 
(DHCS) medical audit for the period of October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023. The 
audit was conducted from October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023. The audit 
consisted of document review, verification studies, and interviews with Plan and Carelon 
(delegated entity) representatives.  
 
An Exit Conference was held with the Plan on March 20, 2024. The Plan was allowed 
15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental 
information addressing the draft audit report findings. On April 3, 2024, the Plan 
submitted a response to address the audit findings. The results of the DHCS evaluation 
of the Plan’s response are reflected in this report. 
 
The audit evaluated four categories of performance: Utilization Management (UM), 
Case Management and Coordination of Care, Member’s Rights, and Administrative and 
Organizational Capacity.  
 
The prior DHCS medical audit for the period July 1, 2021, through September 30, 2022, 
was issued on May 30, 2023. This audit examined documentation for compliance and to 
determine to what extent the Plan had operationalized its Corrective Action Plan. 
 
The summary of findings by category follows:  
 
Category 1 – Utilization Management 
 
The Plan is required to maintain a system that ensures accountability for delegated 
Quality Improvement (QI) activities. The Plan did not implement  policies to include a 
behavioral health practitioner in the QI committee for oversight of the delegated 
behavioral health program. 
 
The Plan is responsible to ensure that the UM program includes: The integration of UM 
activities into the Quality Improvement System (QIS), including a process to integrate 
reports for review by the appropriate QIS staff. Integrated reports will be based on the 
review of the number and types of appeals, denials, deferrals, and modifications. The 
Plan did not ensure the delegate generated accurate integrated reports on its review of 
the number and types of appeals, denials, deferrals, and modifications for the Plan’s 
QI/UM evaluation. 
 
The Plan is required to collect and review delegates’ ownership and control disclosure 
information. Plan delegates are required to provide written disclosure of information on 
ownership and control. The Plan did not collect and review ownership and control 
disclosures of its delegates. 
 
Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 
The Plan is required to complete individualized Care Management Plans (CMPs) for 
 3 of 13 
 members receiving Complex Case Management (CCM). The Plan did not complete 
CMPs for all members receiving CCM. 
 
The Plan is required to include a comprehensive assessment of the member’s condition 
in accordance with all NCQA requirements. The Plan did not conduct a medication 
review as part of the comprehensive assessment of CCM member conditions in 
accordance with NCQA guidelines. 
 
Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 
No findings were noted for the audit period. 
 
Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity 
 
The Plan is required to ensure prompt referral of any potential Fraud, Waste, or Abuse 
(FWA) that the Plan identifies to the DHCS, Audits and Investigation Intake Unit within 
ten working days. The Plan did not report all suspected fraud and abuse incidents to the 
DHCS within ten working days of the date the Plan first became aware of, or was on 
notice of, such activity. 
 
 
  
 4 of 13 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES 
 
 
SCOPE 
 
This audit was conducted by the DHCS Contract and Enrollment Review Division to 
ascertain that the medical services provided to Plan members complied with federal and 
state laws, Medi-Cal regulations and guidelines, and the state Contract. 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
The audit was conducted from October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023, for the 
audit period of October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023. The audit included the review of 
the Plan’s policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement the policies, 
and the verification studies of the implementation and effectiveness of the policies. 
Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted with the Plan administrators, 
staff, and its delegated entity. 
 
The following verification studies were conducted: 
 
Category 1 – Utilization Management 
 
Prior Authorization (PA) Requests: 16 PA requests were reviewed for consistent 
application of criteria, timeliness, appropriate review, and communication of results to 
members and providers. 
 
Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 
Health Risk Assessment (HRA): 26 member files were reviewed to confirm coordination 
of care and fulfillment of HRA requirements. 
 
Continuity of Care (COC): Six member files were reviewed to confirm COC and 
fulfillment of requirements. 
 
Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 
Confidentiality Rights: 15 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act breach and 
security incidents were reviewed for processing and timeliness requirements. 
 
Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity  
 
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse: 18 cases were reviewed for appropriate reporting and 
processing within the required timeframes. 
 
A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report.
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 5 of 13 
  
 
CATEGORY 1 – UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT  
 
 
1.5  
DELEGATION OF UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT  
 
1.5.1 Behavioral Health Program Oversight  
 
The Plan is required to maintain a system to ensure accountability for delegated QI 
activities that, includes the continuous monitoring, evaluation, and approval of the 
delegated functions. (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 4(6)(B)(2))   
 
Plan policy, CMP 31 Oversight of HPSJ Delegated Administrative Functions (revised 
05/05/2023), stated that the Plan shall establish a Delegation Agreement with any 
organization to which it delegates the authority to carry out a function that the Plan 
would otherwise perform. The Plan shall remain accountable for all delegated activities, 
even if the Plan delegates all or part of these activities. The policy delineated behavioral 
health services as delegated functions that required Plan oversight. 
 
Plan policy, QM 38 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee (QIHEC) 
(revised 04/19/2023), designated the QIHEC as the Plan’s oversight body and stated 
that the committee membership shall include behavioral health practitioners, behavioral 
health county partners, and other non-clinical behavioral health providers as part of its 
QIS.   
 
The delegation agreement between the Plan and its delegate required the Plan to have 
a behavioral health practitioner involved in the QIS to oversee behavioral health aspects 
of the program.   
 
Finding: The Plan did not implement its policies to include a behavioral health 
practitioner in its QIHEC for oversight of the delegated behavioral health program.  
 
Review of the QIHEC meeting minutes did not demonstrate that the Plan had a 
behavioral health practitioner participating as a committee member.  
 
In an interview, the Plan confirmed that its QIHEC did not have a designated behavioral 
health practitioner who continuously monitored and evaluated the delegated UM 
functions such as behavioral health services. The Plan stated its Quality 
Management/Utilization Management committee used to have a county health physician 
who served in an oversight role, but the physician left the position due to higher demand 
for his services at the County.  
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 6 of 13 
 When the Plan does not ensure a behavioral health practitioner is involved in the 
behavioral health program, it may lead to a lack of delegate oversight and may have an 
adverse impact on the delivery of medically necessary services.  
 
Recommendation : Revise and implement the Plan’s policies and procedures to include 
a behavioral health practitioner in the Plan’s QIHEC to ensure oversight and 
accountability of the delegated behavioral health program. 
 
1.5.2 Integration of Utilization Management Reports  
 
The Plan is responsible to ensure that the UM program includes: The integration of UM 
activities into the QIS, including a process to integrate reports on review of the number 
and types of appeals, denials, deferrals, and modifications to the appropriate QIS staff. 
(Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 5(1)(G))  
 
The Plan is required to maintain a system to ensure accountability for delegated QI 
activities that includes the continuous monitoring, evaluation, and approval of the 
delegated functions (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 4 (6)(B)(2)) . 
 
Regardless of the relationship the Plan has with a delegate, whether direct or indirect 
through additional layers of contracting or delegation, the Plan has the ultimate 
responsibility for adhering to, and fully complying with, all terms and conditions of its 
contract with the DHCS. ( All Plan Letter  (APL) 23-006, Delegation and Subcontractor 
Network Certification)   
 
Plan policy, CMP 31 Oversight of HPSJ Delegated Administrative Functions (revised 
10/01/2023), stated that the Plan shall continually assess network providers’ and 
contractors’ ability to perform delegated functions. The Plan shall assess through initial 
reviews, ongoing monitoring, annual performance audits, analysis of data, and 
utilization of benchmarks, by desktop review and/or by on-site review. The policy did not 
address oversight to ensure the delivery of quality medical care and appropriateness of 
medical decision making. 
 
Finding: The Plan did not ensure its delegate generated accurate integrated reports in 
the review of the number and types of appeals, denials, deferrals, and modifications for 
the Plan’s QI/UM evaluation. 
 
A verification study review of the Plan’s delegated entity revealed that 27 of 38 services 
for eight members were incorrectly reported in its Applied Behavioral Analysis Prior 
Authorization Log. All 38 services were documented as “modified” determinations. 
However, only 11 services were modified, 25 were approved, and 2 were denied.  
 
Although the policy stated that the Plan would continually assess delegated functions, 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 7 of 13 
 the policy did not address the process to ensure the delivery of quality medical care and 
appropriateness of medical decision making. As part of its oversight process, the Plan 
conducted a delegate annual review; however, the annual review did not verify the 
accuracy of integrated reports for modified or denied pre-service and concurrent review 
service determinations.  
 
During an interview, the Plan stated that oversight of clinical decision making was 
performed in the delegate’s annual audit. However, the annual audit did not identify 
accuracy of the reporting for authorization determinations.  
 
When the Plan does not ensure accurate data collection of prior authorizations, it may 
lead to potential underutilization of medically necessary services, which can prevent 
members from receiving adequate treatment. 
 
Recommendation : Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure the Plan 
and its delegates generate accurate integrated reports on its review of the number and 
types of appeals, denials, deferrals, and modifications for the Plan’s QI/UM evaluation. 
 
1.5.3 Collection and Review of Delegate Ownership and Control 
 
The Plan is required to collect and reviewsubcontractors’ ownership and control 
disclosure information as set forth in Code of Federal Regulations, Title 42, section 
455.104. Subcontractors are required to provide written disclosure of information on 
subcontractors’ ownership and control. The review of ownership and control disclosures 
applies to subcontractors contracting with the Plan. The Plan must make the 
subcontractors’ ownership and control disclosure information available, and upon 
request, this information is subject to audit by DHCS. (APL 17-004, Delegation and 
Subcontractor Network Certification)  
 
Plan policy, CMP 31 Oversight of HPSJ Delegated Functions (revised 10/01/2023),  
stated that upon contracting and annually thereafter, network providers and contractors 
shall provide a written disclosure of the information on ownership and control. This 
information includes, but it is not limited to, date of birth and social security number for 
each person with ownership or control interest and each managing employee.  
 
Finding: The Plan did not collect and review ownership and control disclosures for its 
delegate.  
 
Although the Plan’s policy CMP 31 stated that an annual review of the ownership would 
be conducted, the Plan did not implement its policy to ensure ownership documentation 
was collected and reviewed during the audit period. The Plan did not demonstrate 
implementation of procedures to ensure ownership documentation was collected and 
reviewed annually. The Plan stated in an interview that it requested the delegate’s 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 8 of 13 
 ownership and control disclosure documentation. However, the auditor noted that the 
request was made after the audit period. Additionally, the submitted ownership and 
control disclosure form was unsigned, undated, and did not include the addresses of the 
directors.  
 
When the Plan does not ensure collection and review of delegates’ ownership and 
control disclosures, it may lead to the provision of medical services facilitated by an 
ineligible delegate and may result in potential FWA. 
 
Recommendation : Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure collection 
and review of the ownership and control disclosures fordelegate. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 9 of 13 
  
CATEGORY 2 – CASE MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION OF CARE 
 
 
2.1  
BASIC CASE MANAGEMENT  
 
2.1.1 Complex Care Management Plans 
 
The Plan’s CCM program must include comprehensive assessment of the member’s 
condition; determination of available benefits and resources; development and 
implementation of a CMP with performance goals, monitoring and follow-up. (Contract, 
Exhibit A, Amendment 39, Attachment 22(7)(B)(1)(c))  
 
The Plan must ensure that the CCM Care Manager completes a CMP for all members 
receiving CCM. The CMP must:  
a. Address a member’s health and social needs, including needs due to Social 
Drivers of Health.  
b. Be reviewed and updated at least annually, upon a change in member’s condition 
or level of care, or upon request of the member. 
c. Be in an electronic format, a part of the member’s medical record, and document 
all of the member’s services and treating providers.  
d. Be developed using a person-centered planning process that includes identifying, 
educating, and training the member’s parents, family members, legal guardians, 
Authorized Representatives , caregivers, or authorized support persons, as 
needed; and  
e. Include referrals to community-based social services and other resources even if 
they are not Covered Services under this Contract.  
(Contract, Exhibit A, Amendment 39, Attachment 22(7)(B)(1)(c)) 
 
Plan policy, CM71 Complex Case Management (effective 08/11/2023),  delineated the 
components of a comprehensive assessment and individualized care plan, but did not 
note the provision of the components for all members receiving CCM. The policy did not 
state that the Plan would complete a CMP for all members receiving CCM or that the 
CMP was person-centered with input from the member, the member’s family, the 
provider, and interdisciplinary team. 
 
Finding: The Plan did not complete CMPs for all members receiving CCM. 
 
A verification study revealed that seven of seven eligible CCM member files did not 
contain a care management plan. All seven member files did not contain evidence of an 
individualized care plan with primary care physician or family member input. 
 
The Plan confirmed in an interview that care management staff did not create a care 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 10 of 13 
 plan or provide CCM services until the member gave consent. The Plan attributed the 
lack of access to complete medical records for the failure to complete CMPs for 
members. The Plan stated that they only had access to the CCM referrals. 
 
When the Plan does not complete CMPs for all members receiving CCM, it may lead to 
harmful consequences such as worsening symptoms, disease complications, and 
increased healthcare costs. 
 
Recommendation : Revise policies and implement procedures to ensure that CCM 
services are provided to all eligible members through an opt-out CCM program 
approach. 
 
2.1.2 National Committee for Quality Assurance Complex Case Management 
Requirements 
 
The Plan is required to operate and administer CCM in accordance with all NCQA 
CCM standards and requirements and coordinate services for high and medium-
rising risk members through the Plan’s CCM approach. The Plan is required to 
maintain policies and procedures that, at a minimum, include a comprehensive 
assessment of the member’s condition, determination of available benefits and 
resources, and development and implementation of a CMP with performance 
goals, monitoring and follow up. (Contract Exhibit A, Amendment 39, Attachment 
22 (7)(B)(1)(b))  
 
NCQA guidelines require the Plan’s CCM procedures to include documentation of 
clinical history which should include medication review. (National Committee for Quality 
Assurance, Appendix 2, QI 8: Complex Case Management, Element G: Case 
Management Process (2))  
 
Plan policy, CM66 Health Risk Assessments Case Management and Disease 
Management (revised 06/02/2023), stated that the Plan shall follow all NCQA 
guidelines. The policy requires a discharge case manager to perform medication 
reconciliation for patients changing levels of care. However, it did not address a review 
of member medications for the outpatient CCM program. 
 
Finding: The Plan did not maintain procedures to ensure a comprehensive assessment 
of the members’ condition in accordance with NCQA guidelines. 
 
A verification study revealed that seven of seven CCM member files did not include a 
review of medications. Although the Plan’s policy stated that it will follow NCQA 
guidelines, the Plan did not have an established process to ensure a review of 
medication was included as part of its comprehensive assessment of the member’s 
conditions.  
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 11 of 13 
  
During an interview, the Plan acknowledged that staff did not review medications as part 
of the comprehensive review. The Plan attributed the lack of access to complete 
medical records as the reason for failure to complete medication reviews for members 
receiving CCM. The Plan stated that they only had access to the CCM referrals. 
 
When the Plan does not ensure a comprehensive assessment of the members’ 
condition in accordance with NCQA guidelines, it may have an adverse impact on 
member health and lead to increased healthcare costs.   
 
Recommendation : Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure a 
comprehensive review of member conditions in accordance with NCQA guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 12 of 13 
  
CATEGORY 6 – ADMINISTRATIVE AND ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY 
 
 
6.2  
FRAUD AND ABUSE   
 
6.2.1 Fraud, Waste, or Abuse Reporting to DHCS  
 
The Plan is required to ensure prompt referral of any potential FWA that the Plan 
identifies to the DHCS, Audits and Investigation Intake Unit. The Plan shall conduct, 
complete, and report to DHCS, the results of a preliminary investigation of the 
suspected fraud and/or abuse within ten working days of the date the Plan first 
becomes aware of, or is on notice of, such activity. (Contract, Exhibit E, Attachment 2 
(26)(B)(7))  
 
Plan policy, CMP05 Fraud Waste and Abuse (revised 03/04/2021), stated that the Plan 
must report to DHCS, the California Department of Justice, and any other applicable 
regulatory agencies, all cases of suspected and/or credible FWA when there is reason 
to believe an incident has occurred. Incidents of suspected and/or credible FWA will be 
reported within ten working days of the reported incident. 
 
Finding: The Plan did not report all suspected fraud and abuse incidents to DHCS 
within ten working days of the date the Plan first became aware of, or was on notice of, 
such activity. 
 
A verification study revealed that 6 of 18 FWA cases exceeded ten working days. The 
Plan reported the cases between 12 to 64 days after the date it initially became aware 
of the suspected FWA. 
 
The Plan’s FWA reporting process consisted of a preliminary and full investigation of 
reported allegations. Although the Plan’s policy stated that all suspected and credible 
cases of FWA were to be submitted to DHCS within ten business days, the Plan did not 
follow policy and did not timely report the results of their preliminary investigations to 
DHCS. 
 
During an interview, the Plan stated that suspected fraud was only reported to DHCS 
when enough credible evidence had been obtained from a preliminary investigation. 
Additionally, the Plan stated that it calculated the ten-day reporting requirement using 
the “date created”, which was after the Plan created a lead and when the potential FWA 
became a case. As a result, cases submitted to DHCS did not include all potential fraud. 
 
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN: Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 13 of 13 
 Failure to timely report all identified cases of potential FWA to the DHCS, can limit the 
ability to track, analyze, and respond to the incidents to mitigate the impact to members, 
providers, the Plan, and the Medi-Cal program. 
 
Recommendation : Implement procedures to ensure prompt reporting of all potential 
FWA within ten working days of when the Plan first becomes aware of, or is on notice 
of, the activity. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES 
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION 
SACRAMENTO SECTION 
 
 
 
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
HEALTH PLAN OF SAN JOAQUIN 
 
2023 
 
Contract Number:  
 
  
03-75801 
State Supported Services 
Audit Period:  
 
 
 
Dates of Audit:  
 
 
 
Report Issued:  
 October 1, 2022 
    Through 
July 31, 2023 
 
October 30, 2023 
    Through 
November 10, 2023 
 
April 9, 2024 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION .............................................................................1 
 
Il. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ...................................................2 
 
 
 
 
 1 of 2 I. INTRODUCTION  
 
 
The report presents the audit findings of the contract compliance audit of the Health Plan 
of San Joaquin (Plan), and its implementation of the State Supported Services  
Contract Number 03-75801 with the State of California. The State Supported Services 
Contract covers abortion services for the Plan. 
 
The audit was conducted from October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023 and 
covered the review period from October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023. The audit 
consisted of a  document review of materials provided by the Plan and interviews with Plan 
staff. Twenty-five State Supported Services claims were reviewed for appropriate and 
timely adjudication. 
 
An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on March 20, 2024. The Plan was allowed 15 
calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information 
addressing the draft audit report findings. The findings in the report reflect the evaluation 
of all relevant information received prior and subsequent to the Exit Conference. 
 
  
 
 COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
PLAN:  Health Plan of San Joaquin  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: October 30, 2023, through November 10, 2023   
 
 
 2 of 2  
STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES 
 
SSS.1 Misdirected Claims 
 
The Plan is required to maintain a sufficient claims processing system with the 
capability to comply with applicable state and federal law, regulations, and Contract 
requirements. (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 8(5) (C))  
 
The Plan is required to forward all misdirected claims to the appropriate capitated 
provider within ten working days of receipt. (California Code of Regulations, Title 28, 
section 1300.71(b)(2))  
 
Plan policy CLMS12, Misdirected Claims (revised 12/01/2021),  stated the Plan is 
required to forward misdirected claims to the appropriate payer or delegated provider 
within ten business days of receipt of the claim. 
 
Finding: The Plan did not forward misdirected claims within ten working days of receipt. 
 
A verification study revealed that the Plan did not forward three of five misdirected state 
supported services claims to the appropriate capitated provider within ten working days 
of receipt. For all three claims, the Plan notified providers that the claims should be 
directed to the responsible delegated entity. However, the misdirected claims were 
forwarded between 16 to 18 days after the date of receipt. 
 
The Plan did not follow its policy which required misdirected claims to be forwarded to 
their delegated entity within ten working days. The Plan stated in an interview that a gap 
within the IT processing system was identified during the onsite audit. The Plan noted 
that during the audit period there were specific queues within the IT system that would 
at times cause misdirected claims to be forwarded after the tenth business day.  
 
When the Plan does not forward misdirected claims timely, providers may not be 
reimbursed for services rendered and may be discouraged from treating members.  
 
Recommendation: Implement procedures to ensure forwarding of misdirected claims 
within ten working days. 
