    
California Department of Health Care Services                                                                    
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division    
P.O. Box 997413 | Sacramento , CA | 95899-7413  
MS 4400  | Phone ( 916) 449-5000  | www. dhcs.ca.gov  State of California  
Gavin Newsom, Governor   
California Health and Human Services Agency  
 
 April 19, 2024   Mary Lourdes Leone, Chief Compliance Officer  
CalViva Health  
7625 N. Palm Avenue, Suite 109  
Fresno, CA 93711  
  RE:  Department of Health Care Services Medical Audit     
 
 
Dear Ms. Leone:  
 The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), Audits and Investigations Division conducted an on- site Medical Audit of CalViva Health , a Managed Care Plan (MCP), 
from April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023.  The audit covered the period of April 1, 20 22 
through March 31, 2023.  
  
The items were  evaluated, and DHCS accepted the MCP’s submitted Corrective Action 
Plan (CAP). The CAP is hereby closed. The enclosed documents will serve as DHCS’ final response to the MCP’s CAP. Closure of this CAP does not halt any other processes in place between DHCS and the MCP regarding the deficiencies in the audit report or elsewhere, nor does it preclude the DHCS from taking additional actions it deems necessary regarding these deficiencies.  
 Please be advised that in accordance with Health & Safety Code Section 1380(h) and the Public Recor ds Act, the final audit report and final CAP remediation document (final 
Attachment A) will be made available on the DHCS website and to the public upon request.  
  
If you have any questions, please reach out to CAP Compliance personnel.  
 Sincerely,  
 [Signa ture on file]
 
 Lyubov Poonka, Chief  
Audit Monitoring Unit  
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division  
Department of Health Care Services Department of Health Care Services  
   Enclosures:  Attachment A (CAP Response Form)  
 cc:      Stacy Nguyen, Chief  
Managed Care Monitoring Branch Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division  
Department of Health Care Services  
 Anthony Martinez , Lead Analyst   
Audit Monitoring Unit  
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division  
Department of Health Care Services  
 
Ikonkar  Kaur, Contract Manager  
 Medi -Cal Managed Care Division  
Department of Health Care Services  
  
ATTACHMENT A 
Corrective Action Plan Response Form  
 
Plan : CalViva Health               Review Period:  04/01/22 – 03/31/23 
 Audit  Type:  Medical Audit and State Supported Services                                  On-site Review:  04/17/23 – 04/28/23 
 
 
 MCPs are required to provide a CAP and respond to all documented deficiencies  included in  the medical  audit report within 30 calendar days , unless an alternative 
timeframe is indicated in the CAP Request letter.  MCPs are required to submit the CAP  in Word format that will reduce turnaround time for DHCS to complete its 
review.  According to ADA requirement, the document should be at least 12 pt.  
 The CAP submission must include a written statement identifying the deficiency and describing the plan of action taken to cor rect the deficiency, and the 
operational results of that action.  The MCP shall directly address each deficiency component by c ompleting the following columns provided for MCP response: 1. 
Finding Number and Summary , 2. Action Taken, 3. Implementation Documentation, and 4. Completion/Expected Completion Date. The MCP will be required to 
include project timeline with milestones in a separate document for each finding. Supporting documentation should accompany each Action Taken. If supporting documentation is missing, the MCP submission will not be accepted.  For policies and other documentation that have been revised, please highlight the new 
relevant text, and include additional detail such as title of the document, page number, revision date, etc. in the column “Supporting Documentation” to assist 
DHCS in identifying any updates that were made by the plan.   For deficiencies that require short -term corrective action, implementation should be completed within 
30 calendar days. For deficiencies that may be reasonably determined to require long- term corrective action  for a period longer than 30 days to completely remedy 
or operationalize, the MCP is to indicate that it has initiated remedial action and is on the way towards achieving an accept able level of compliance.  In those 
instances, the MCP will be required in addition to the above steps, to include the date when full compliance will be achieved.   Policies and procedures submitted 
during the CAP process must still be sent to the MCP’s Contract Manager for review and approval, as applicable in accordance with exis ting requirements.  
 Please note, DHCS expects the plan to take swift action to implement improvement interventions as proposed in the CAP, theref ore DHCS encourages 
all remediation efforts to be in place no later than month 6 of the CAP, unless prior approval for an extended implementation effort is granted by DHCS.  
 DHCS will maintain close communication with the MCP throughout the CAP process and provide technical assistance to ensure the MCP provides sufficient 
documentation to correct deficiencies.  Depending on the volume and complexity of deficiencies identified, DHCS may require the MCP to provide weekly updates, as applicable.  
 
  
 - 2 -  
Finding Number 
and Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting Documentation  Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
4. Member Rights  
4.1.1 Classification 
of Grievances  
 The Plan did not classify, process, review, or resolve all expressions of dissatisfaction as grievances.  The Plan has performed a review 
of the materials and processes 
used to ensure appropriate 
identif ication of  inquiries, exempt 
grievances, formal grievances 
and appeals.  
 
1. An annual A&G computer -
based training has been in 
place. However, in the first half of 2023 t his training 
was reviewed and 
redesigned into a progressive training program designed to create a better understanding of A&G concepts and best practices.  The training will 
be delivered through the company training portal .  
2. All new hire s and existing 
Customer Service Advocate (“CSAs”) are 
required to pass the A&G  
training. Newly hired CSAs must pass the A&G  
section  with 80% or better   
      1. Training:   
 CA CCC AG 101 Proficiency Exam  
CA CCC AG 102 Proficiency Exam  
CA CCC AG 103 Proficiency Exam  
      
2. P&P: CA.HNT.MBRS.61  
Member Appeals and Grievances Training Pass/Fail  
   
  
      
1. 10/31/2023 
             
2. 10/31/2023 
     
 The following documentation supports the MCP’s efforts 
to correct this finding:  
 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES  
 • Updated P&P, CA.COMP.CCO.007, “CA Operations 
Oversight  – Audit of Inquiry Calls, Appeal and 
Grievance Cases Originating from the Call Center”, (Updated 06/23) which demonstrates this P&P has 
been updated to include the number of inquiry  calls 
that will be included in the monthly monitoring effort. If there ar e no missed or failed elements within the 
first 8 cases, the Quality analyst will conclude the audit and the Data analyst will share the audit results with the business owner (CSA’s direct supervisor(s), manager and cc the Director) and the CA Operations Oversight team. If the supervisor has ‘repeat offenders’ (the same CSA with repeat failed audits), the supervisor will begin a performance improvement plan for the CSA.  If the supervisor 
receives repeat audit fails within their team, for at least 3 consecutive months, a Management Action Plan ( MAP) will be submitted to the Manager.  
 
• In addition, effective 07/2023, the Plan implemented 
an audit worksheet, the auditor will use the elements in the audit worksheet to make certain the inquiries 
are not being misclassified as inquiries. The Plan 
 - 3 -  
Finding Number 
and Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting Documentation  Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
to graduate  training to 
handle member calls . All 
CSAs are tested annually and must pass the training with 80% or better  to 
continue to handle member calls .  The P&P 
describing this process has been reviewed and determined to be up to date.  
3. Quality auditors conduct random “Secret Shopper ” 
calls monthly  using 
scenarios to assess the 
CSAs knowledge and 
proper handling of a ppeals 
and grievances.  
Leadership uses these findings to coach and develop the CSAs . The 
script used for the calls has been updated on 
10/18/2023  to include 
additional scenarios to ensure that inquiries and many types of expressions of dissatisfaction are 
included.   
          
3. Quality Audit:  A&G Secret 
Shopper Legend  
                 
          
3. 10/31/2023  
                
 states, “the Plan anticipates having CalViva Health 
Data broken out by the end of Q1 2024.”  
  
• Revised P&P, CA.HNT.MBRS.10, “Customer in Mind Quality (CMQ) Program” (06/01/2023) describes the responsibility of the Quality Auditor. The quality audit includes call listening to verify  that 
all CSAs are providing  the caller with appropriate 
service and identifying expression s of 
dissatisfaction.  In addition, an employee will be 
monitored at any time during the month by QA (i.e.; the Missed Opportunity report or Secret Shopper), a trainer, immediate Supervisor, or any member of the leadership team to verify  consistency in the 
application of the CMQ policies and procedures.  
 • Revised P&P, CA.HNT.MBRS.39, “Customer Service Representative Role” (05/2023) was revised 
to include that CSR’s are responsible to properly identify an expression of dissatisfaction (whether it be verbal or nonverbal) as an Exempt or Standard Grievance.  
 
• P&P, CA.HNT .MBRS.61, “Member Appeals and 
Grievance Training Pass/Fail” (04/23) demonstrates the Plan’s has annual testing for trained associates 
that are taking customer phone calls .  This testing is 
a Pass/Fail process to verify if the associates are 
proficient in recognizing, appropriately categorizing, 
 - 4 -  
Finding Number 
and Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting Documentation  Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
4. In July 2023 , a new 
monthly  monitoring effort  
was implemented that 
includes listening to up to 
80 recorded calls to 
ensure that there is proper identification of inquiries.   
As part of this  monitoring,  
a monthly CA Operations 
Oversight meeting has 
been established to review 
results and instances 
related to improper issue 
identification.   
5. The enclosed P&P 
outlining the Monthly Quality Audit  process  has 
been reviewed and 
updated to include the “Missed Opportunit y 
Report ” and the Secret  
Shopper audit . This P&P 
is being re distributed to all 
CSAs to inform staff of the 
monitoring changes and all other policy updates. The CSA will be required to acknowledge that the docum ent has been 4. P&P:  CA.COMP.CCO.007 - CA 
Compliance Oversight -  Audit of 
Appeal and Grievance Cases Originating from the Call Center  
         
 5. P&P:  CA.HNT.MBRS.10  - 
Customer in Mind Quality (CMQ) Program             4. 7/31/2023  
             
5. 10/31/2023  
              and/or routing issues to the Appeals and Grievance 
department.    
 • Associates who cannot pass the A&G portion of Member Services New Hire training or annual A&G 
training will be subject to disciplinary action which can include coaching and performance improvement plans up to and including termination of employment.   
 • Updated Work Process , “Responsibilities to Identify 
and I nvestigate Issues Raised by Members and 
Providers” (08/16/22) updated to include the responsibility of proper identification of expressions of dissatisfaction (verbal and non- verbal).  
  TRAINING  
 • CA.CCC AG 101, 201, and 301 Proficiency Exam  -
Identifying A&G Examples of QOC and QOS grievances: This material is used as a part of the quarterly grievance and appeals refresher training. The quarterly training has been updated to include a knowledge check to verify  continued reinforcement 
identifica tion of issues, exempt grievances, standard 
grievances and appeals.  
 
• Updating the Appeals and Grievance training to 
 - 5 -  
Finding Number 
and Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting Documentation  Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
received and reviewed . 
6. An A&G q uarterly 
refresher  training is 
conducted.  The material 
has been updated to include a knowledge check to ensure continued 
reinforcement identification of i nquiries, 
exempt grievances, 
standard grievances and 
appeals. By 10/31/2023 
an off-cycle  training will be 
distributed to all CSAs . 
7. The P&P that outlines the role of the Call Center representatives has  
recently  been reviewed 
and updated to include the responsibility of proper identification of expressions of dissatisfaction (verbal and non-verbal). The CSA will 
be required to acknowledge that the document has been received and reviewed.  
8. The material discussing  
6. Training:  Identifying Appeals 
and Grievances  
           
7. P&P:  CA.HNT.MBRS.39  
Customer Service Representative Role  
           
8. CP Article:  Responsibilities  to  
6. 10/31/2023  
            
7. 10/31/2023  
             
8. 10/31/2023  include more realistic grievance call scenarios to 
improve the agent’s ability to appropriately distinguish inquiry, exempt grievance, and standard grievance calls. (Completion date expected 05/31/24) . 
 • The Plan has also implemented knowledge checks in their training program.  Additionally, the entire Call Center staff will be retrained on all Appeals and Grievance procedures and processes.  
 • Module, “Member Appeals and Grievance Informational Module” demonstrates the Plan provides additional detail to their Customer Service Advocate’s (CSA’s) on how to identify a grievance.  
 • Informing Material, “Responsibilities to Identify and Investigate I ssues Raised by Members and 
Providers” demonstrates the Plan has sent a reminder to all CSA’s of the responsibility to identify and investigate all member grievances.   
 
• “Secret Shopper Document” is used to train/audit CSA’s to assist them with understandi ng what 
constitutes an expression of dissatisfaction. This document provides various examples of what a caller may call about that might be considered an expression of dissatisfaction and should be identified 
as a grievance.  
 - 6 -  
Finding Number 
and Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting Documentation  Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
the responsibility of the 
CSA to identify and investigate issues has 
been reviewed for update and has been determined to be up to date. This material will be resent to all CSAs as a reminder of the responsibility to identify and investigate all member  issues. The CSA 
will be required to acknowledge that the document has been received and reviewed.  
9. The material outlining the process for performing a quality review  of A&G 
issues  has been reviewed 
for update and has been determined to be up to date. This material will be resent to all CSAs as a reminder of the review process ensuring that all inquiries, exempt grievances, standard grievances,  and appeals 
are appropriately identifi ed Identify and Investigate Issue s 
             
 9. CP Article:  Standard Appeals 
and Grievances Quality Review Process  
  
            
  9. 10/31/2023   
• Training, “Appeals and Grievances Training Guide” (05/25/23) demonstrates the Plan’s Call Center Leadership provided voluntary training regarding examples of formal grievance scenarios.  
 • Meeting, “Q1 2023 Call Center Meeting” (02/09/23 -  
02/28/23) which demonstrates the Plan hosted a review with all available Call Service Advocates (CSA’s) in department staff meeting in regard to the grievance process.  
  
 MONITORING  AND OVERSIGHT  
 • The CMQ Quality scorecard is categorized into four (4) main categories, Service, Resolution, Experience,  and Compliance.  Each category will be 
rated on the caller experience using the following scale:  
 
• Not Meeting Expectations  
• Sometimes Meeting Expectations  
• Fully Meeting Expectations  
• Exceeding Expectation 
 
• In efforts to measure the overall customer satisfaction and experience, employees are 
expected to achieve a score of 90% or higher.  
 - 7 -  
Finding Number 
and Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting Documentation  Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
by the CSAs.  The CSA will 
be required to acknowledge that the document has been received and reviewed.  
  
• Quality Audit, “A&G Secret Shopper Example Legend” ( January – August 2023) Process 
Overview: Quality auditors conduct random Secret shopper calls monthly  to CSA’s and/or CSR’s using 
scenarios to identify call center associate’s knowledge regarding proper handling of Appeals and Grievances.  Leadership uses findings to coach and develop the associates.   
 
• A & G Dashboard through September 2023 provides a comprehensive review of the grievance processes with specific classification, counts and trends over 
time for exempt, QOS, QOC, and appeal case types.       
 • A & G Quarterly Executive Summary Q2 & Q3 2023 reflect an increase in the number of grievances reported in 2023 in particular an increase in Quality of Service (QOS) cases this year indicating that Call Center has increased their identification of grievances.  These cases are then forwarded to the A & G team for classificati on, processing,  and 
reporting.                         
 
• A & G Classification Audits Q2 & Q3 2023 –  Q3 
results reflect a total of 327 cases were audited, 21 
grievances were misclassified . The compliance rate 
was 86%. The misclassifications were recognized 
through real -time auditing and corrected before the 
 - 8 -  
Finding Number 
and Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting Documentation  Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
case was closed.  
 • Audit Results, “CalViva January 2024 Inquiry Call Audit Results”, ( 01/24)  total of 10 cases audited, five 
cases were auditable with 100% complianc e rate 
and five case were inaudible due to the call recording could not be located, call recording inaudible, and the call recording is disconnected prior to the end of the call.  
 The corrective action plan for finding 4.1.1 is accepted.  
 
  
 
  Submitted by Plan : Mary Lourdes Leone                              Date:   10/20/23 
  Title:  Chief Compliance Officer  
     
