       
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT  REVIEW  DIVISION             
SANTA ANA 
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
Orange County Organized Health System dba 
CalOptima  
 
2023 
 
Contract Number:  
  
08-85214  
 
Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit:     
Report Issued:   February 1, 2022  
    Through 
January 31, 2023  February 27, 2023    Through March 10, 2023  
 
August 17, 2023  
     
 
  
 
   
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. 1 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................................................. 2 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  ...................................................... 4 
 IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care ............ 6 
          
 
 
 1 of 9 I. INTRODUCTION  
 Orange County Organized Health System dba CalOptima Health Plan (P lan) was 
founded in 1993 via a partnership with  the local government , the medical community 
(hospitals and physicians) , and health advocates. In 1995, the Plan began operation as 
a County Or ganized Health System for Orange County to provide medical care for 
Medi -Cal beneficiaries.  
 In addition, the Plan is currently governed by a Board of Directors of ten  members 
appointed by the Orange County Board of Supervisors. The Board of Directors is comprised of Plan members, providers, business leaders, and local government representatives.  
 The Plan currently has several programs to provide medical care to its m embers 
residing in Orange County . As of December 31, 2022, the composition of the Plan 
membership was as follows:  
 
• Medi -Cal: 927,086 Medi -Cal recipients for low -income individuals, families with 
children, seniors, and people with disabilities.  
• OneCare (Health Maintenance Organization Special Needs Plan): 17,381 Medi -
Cal and  Medicare members . 
• Program of All -Inclusive Care for the Elderly: 437 Medicare/Medicaid and Medi -
Cal recipients aged 55 and older who live in the services area and are eligible for nursing facility services.  
   
 
 2 of 9 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 This report presents the audit findings of the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) medical review audit for the period of February 1, 2022 through January 31, 
2023. The review was conducted from February 27, 2023 through March 10, 2023. The audit consisted of a document review, verification studies, and interviews with Plan 
personnel.  
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on July 12, 2023.  The Plan was allowed 15 
calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing the audit report findings. The Pan did  provide additional information after the 
Exit Conference, which DHCS reviewed.  
 The audit evaluated six categories of performance: Utilization Management, Case Management and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Members ’ 
Rights, Quality Management, and Administrative and Organizational Capacity.  
 The prior DHCS medical audit, for the audit period of February 1, 2020 through December 31, 2021, was issued on November 8, 2022. This audit examined documentation for compliance.  
 The summary of the findings by category is as follows :  
 Category 1 –  Utilization Management  
 There were no findings in this category for this audit period.  
 Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 The Plan is required to ensure that an Initial Health Assessment (IHA) is performed by the member ’s assigned P rimary Care Provider (PCP) and non- physician mid -level 
practitioners. The Plan did not ensure compliance and the provision of the Plan’ s 
contracted PCPs to perform IHA to new members.  
 The Plan is required to implement policies and procedures to ensure the Pediatric Risk Stratification Process (PRSP) provision s are performed to Whole Child Model  (WCM). 
The Plan did not ensure that members who did not have medical utilization data, claims processing data history, or other assessments or surveys information available for PRSP were automatically categorized as high risk until further assessment data was 
gathered to make an additional risk determination.  
 Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
 There were no findings in this category for this audit period.  
 Category 4 –  Member ’s Rights  
 
 3 of 9  There were no findings in this category for this audit period.  
 Category 5 –  Quality Management  
 There were no findings in this category for this audit period.  
 Category 6 –  Administrative and Organizational Capacity 
 There were no findings in this category for this audit period.  
  
 
 4 of 9 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  
 
SCOPE  
 The DHCS Contract and Enrollment Review Division conducted this audit to ascertain whether the medical services provided to Plan members comply with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and State Contracts.  
  
PROCEDURE  
 The following verification studies were conducted from February 27, 2023 through 
March 10, 2023. The audit included a review of the Plan ’s contracts with DHCS, its 
policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement the policies, and verification studies of the implementation and effectiveness of the policies. Do cuments 
were reviewed, and interviews were conducted with the Plan’ s administrators, a 
delegated entity, and staff.  
 The following verification studies were conducted:  
 Category 1 – Utilization Management  
 Prior Authorization: 29 medical prior authorization, 15 pharmacy prior authorization, and 
30 delegated prior authorization were reviewed for medical necessity, consistent application of criteria, timeliness, appropriate review, and communication of results to members and providers.  
 Prior Auth orization Appeal Procedures:  20 medical prior authorization of which eight 
were upheld, and 12 we re overturned were reviewed to ensure that required timeframes 
were met and appeals were appropriately routed and adjudicated.    Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 IHA: 20 m edical were reviewed for completeness and timely completion.  
 WCM : 20 WCM  records were reviewed for appropriate care coordination.  
 Category 4 – Member ’s Rights  
 Exempt Grievances: Five exempt grievance cases were reviewed to verify the classification, reporting timeframes, and investigation process.  
 Quality of Services: 21 cases were reviewed for timeliness, investigation process, and appropriate resolution.  
 Quality of Care: 20 standard grievances were reviewed for processing, clear and timely 
 
 5 of 9 response, and appropriate level of review.  
 Category 5 –  Quality Management  
 Potential Quality Improvement :  12 cases were reviewed for response to the 
complainant and submission to the appropriate level for review.  
 Category 6 –  Administrative and Organizational Capacity 
 Fraud, Waste, and Abuse: Ten cases were r eviewed for proper investigative process, 
and timely reported to DHCS for review.  
 Overpayment Reporting: Ten overpayment recovery cases were reviewed for timely reporting to DHCS  and annual reporting of total overpayment recoveries to DHCS.  
 A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report.  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN:  Orange County Organized Health System dba CalOptima 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  February 1, 2022 through January 31, 2023   
DATE OF AUDIT: February 27, 2023 through March 10, 2023  
 
 
 6 of 9   
CATEGORY 2 – CASE MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION OF CARE 
  
2.1  
INITIAL HEALTH ASSESSMENT  
 2.1.1 Provision of Initial Health Assessment  
 The Plan is required to comply with all existing final Policy Letters and All Plan Letters (APL) issued by DHCS. (COHS Contract, Exhibit E, Attachment 2(D))  Medi -Cal Managed Care Division (MMCD) Policy Letter 08- 003, requires the Plan to 
ensure an IHA is performed by member ’s PCP, perinatal care providers, and non-
physician mid- level practitioners (nurse practitioners, certified nurse midwives, physician 
assistants, and PCPs  in training).  
 The Plan Policy , (# GG1613) Initial Health Assessment Initial Health Assessment  
(Revised December 1, 2021) , states an IHA should be performed by the member ’s 
assigned PCP, perinatal care provider during a member pregnancy, and non- physician 
mid-level practitioners such as nurse practitioners, certified nurse midwives, physician 
assistants, and PCPs  in training. The policy also indicates the Plan monitors PCP IHA 
completion during Facility Site Review (FSR) and Medical Record Review (MRR). The Plan may issue a C orrective Action Plan (CAP) to any provider or practitioner that fails 
to meet the IHA documentation metrics.  
 Finding:  The Plan did not ensure that an IHA was  performed by the member ’s PCP, 
perinatal care providers, and non- physician mid- level practitioners.  
 The verification study identified three new members who had IHA performed by a 
psychiatrist or ophthalmologist.  The Plan used service codes in claims as  one of the process to identify if an IHA is 
completed. In addition to the service codes and the dates of service, claims also listed 
the provider ’s names and specialt ies who performed the billed services. However, when 
there w ere an Evaluation and Management (E&M) codes such as 99202 to 99205 used 
to claim for a new member ’s visit, the Plan identified that claim as an IHA completion 
without checking the provider ’s special ty on the claim to ensure IHA was provided by a 
PCP, perinatal care providers, and non- physician mid- level practitioners as required. 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN: Orange County Organized Health System dba CalOptima 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  February 1, 2022 through January 31, 2023   
DATE OF AUDIT: February 27, 2023 through March 10, 2023  
 
 
 7 of 9 Therefore, the three new members who had IHA performed by a psychiatrist or ophthalmologist did not have an IHA completion performed by their assigned PCPs.  
During the interview, the Plan acknowledged that its  used E&M code as one of the 
service  codes to identify IHA completion, but the Plan did not check the provider 
specialty on the claim to ensure that a new member ’s IHA was performed by their 
selected or assigned PCP as required.  
 The Quality Improvement Committee (QIC) Meeting Minutes on March 8,  2022 showed 
only the review of number of MRR CAPs issued to providers during the Plan’ s 2021 
FSR/MRR audit. The QIC did not review the IHA completion rates and ensure that a new member ’s IHA was performed by their selected or assigned PCP as required. The 
IHA and Individual Health Education B ehavioral Assessment were reviewed as a 
criterion for the MRR s. The MRR s were  compl eted as part of the FSR process of the 
Plans’ PCPs. The FSR/MRR reports wer e submitted to QIC annually for review. The 
2021 FSR/MRR report was presented to the QIC on March 8, 2022. The FSR/MRR 
reports contained FSR scores, MRR scores, the number of initial MRRs, the number of 
periodic MRRs, and the number of MRR CAPs issued to the reviewed site providers. 
The FSR/MRR reports did not specifically outline the IHA completion rates . In addition, 
the Plan did not have a process to monitor and ensure a new member’s IHA was performed by their PCP, perinatal care provider, and non- physician mid -level 
practitioner as required.  
 The IHA is a comprehensive assessment that is completed during the member ’s initial 
encounter with a selected or assigned PC P. The IHA assists the member ’s PCP to 
assess and manage the member’s acute, chronic, and preventive health needs . If the 
IHA is not performed for each new member by their PCP, the provider cannot  identify 
and treat the member ’s mental, physical, psycholog ical, and preventative health needs.  
Recommendation:  Revised and implement policies and procedures to ensure 
compliance and the provision of the Plan ’s contracted PCPs to perform IHA to new 
members.  
    
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN: Orange County Organized Health System dba CalOptima 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  February 1, 2022 through January 31, 2023   
DATE OF AUDIT: February 27, 2023 through March 10, 2023  
 
 
 8 of 9  
2.2  
CALIFO RNIA CHILDREN’ S SERVICES  
 2.2.1 Performance of Pediatric Risk Stratification Process  
 The Plan is required to comply with all existing final Policy Letters and APL issued by DHCS. (COHS Contract, Exhibit E, Attachment 2(D))  
 MMCD APL 21-005 requires the Plan to have a pediatric risk stratification mechanism, 
or algorithm, to assess the California Children Services (CCS) -eligible member ’s risk 
level that will be used to classify members into high and low  risk categories, allowing  the 
Plan to identify members who have more complex health care needs. The Plan must complete a risk stratification within 45 days of enrollment for all members, including new CCS members enrolling in the MCP and newly CCS -eligible members by using the 
medical utilizat ion and claims processing data, existing member assessment or survey 
data, and telephonic or in- person communications. Members w ith no medical utilization 
data, claims processing data history, or other assessments and/or survey information must be automati cally categorized as high risk until further assessment data is gathered 
to make an additional risk determination.  
 Plan Policy , (# GG1330)  Case Management California Children Services Program 
Whole Child Model  (Revised August 18, 2022) , state d the Plan identifies the health risk 
of each CCS -eligible member using a DHCS -approved proprietary pediatric r isk 
stratification algorithm within 45 calendar days of the eligibility with the CCS program. The PRSP includes the review of medical utilization data, medical claims , and 
encounter data, existing assessment or survey data, pharmacy data, data provided by the local CCS program and DHCS, and telephonic or in- person communications, if 
available at the time of the risk stratification. If a member does not have the noted data 
available, the Plan will automatically categorize such member s as high risk until the 
Plan is able to gather further assessment data to make an additional risk determination.  
 , Whole Child Model  Pediatric Risk Stratification Technical Specifications  (Revised May 
27, 2021) , described the business rules for WCM PRSP with the scoring algorithm: high 
risk is ≥ 19 points , and low risk is < 19 points.  
 Finding:  The Plan did not ensure that members who did not have medical uti lization 
data, claims processing data history, or other assessments or survey information available for PRSP were  automatically categorized as high risk until further assessment 
data was gathered to make an additional risk determination.  
 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN: Orange County Organized Health System dba CalOptima 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  February 1, 2022 through January 31, 2023   
DATE OF AUDIT: February 27, 2023 through March 10, 2023  
 
 
 9 of 9 The verification study identified eight  WCM members had no medical utilization data, 
claims processing data history, or other assessment or survey information besides their 
diagnosis for PRSP. The Plan scored 14 points for the diagnosis of cancer and eight  
points for other diagnos es. The total points were either eight  or 14 for each member. 
Based on the total points, the member was c ategorized as low risk instead of 
automatically high risk as required.  
 During an interview , the Plan acknowledged that it did not have the process to monitor 
PRSP performance. The Plan also acknowledged that the low risk level assigned to a 
member whose diagnosis was the only available data during the PRSP was incorrect.  
The Plan ’s, Whole Child Model  Clinical Advisory Committee (CAC) (meeting dates: 
February 15, 2022, M ay 17, 2022, and August 16, 2022) , reviewed WCM measures in 
utilization management of Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, durable medical equipment, and emergency department; WCM grievances and resolution services; and WCM customer service inquiries. The WCM CAC did not discuss and review the WCM PRSP 
performance monitoring.  
 The Plan ’s, Quality Improvement Committee (meeting dates from February 2022 
through November 2022) reviewed and approved the WCM CAC meeting minutes. There was no discussion or review of WCM PRSP performance monitoring for quality 
improvement.  
 The WCM member ’s risk level is used to classify members into high and low risk 
categories and assist the Plan in identifying members who have more complex  health 
care needs. When a high risk WCM member is incorrectly categorized as low risk,  the 
member ’s needs will not be met and consequently, the quality of care may be 
compromised.  
Recommendation:  Revise  and implement policies  and procedures to ensure 
compliance with PRSP performance to WCM members.  
      
       
CONTRACT AND EROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION  - SANTA ANA  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
Orange County Organized Health System dba 
CalOptima  
 
2023 
 
Contract Number:   
  
08-85221  
State Supported Services  
Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit :    
Report Issued:  
 February 1, 2022  
    Through 
January 31, 2023 
 
February 27, 2023 
    Through 
March 10, 2023  
 August 17, 2023  
 
   
    
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. 1 
 Il. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ................................................... 2 
   
 
 1 of 2 I. INTRODUCTION  
 The audit report presents the audit findings of the contract compliance audit of  Orange 
County Organized Health System dba CalOptima (Plan) and its implementation of the State Supported Services contract No. 08- 85221 with the State of California. The State 
Supported Services contract cover s abortion services for the Plan.  
 The review was conducted from February 27, 2023 through March 10, 2023. The audit covered the review period from February 1, 2022 through January 31, 2023. The audit consisted of a document review of materials provided by the Plan and interviews with Plan staff.  
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on July 12, 2023.  
    
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN:   Orange County Organized Health System dba CalOptima  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  February 1, 2022 through January 31, 2023 
DATE OF AUDIT:  February 27, 2023 through March 10, 2023 
 
 
 2 of 2  
STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES  
 
SUMMARY OF FINDING (S): The Plan’s P rovider Manual and M ember Handbook 
indicate that members may access sensitive services, such as abortion and abortion-related services , from any qualified provider, contracted or non- contracted, without prior 
authorization. The Plan has policies and procedures to ensure timely and accurate claims processing. 
 The verification studies noted that abortion services were covered, and members did 
not require prior authorization for these services. There were no material findings during the audit period.  
  
RECOMMENDATION(S):  None.  
   
