  
     
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION 
RANCHO CUCAMONGA SECTION 
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
INLAND EMPIRE HEALTH PLAN  
 
2023  
   
  
Contract Number:  
 
                                  Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit:     
                               Report Issued:  
 04-35765  
 
August 1, 2022  
    Through 
July 31, 2023  
 
September 18 , 2023  
    Through September 29, 2023  
 January 5, 2024  
 
  
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
  I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. 1 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................................................. 2 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  ...................................................... 4 
 IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 Category 1 - Utilization  Management  ............................................... 6 
 Category 4 - Member’s  Rights  ......................................................... 9 
        
 
 1 of 10 
 I. INTRODUCTION 
  Inland Empire Health Plan (Plan) was established on July 26, 1994,  as the local initiative 
Medi -Cal Managed Care Health Plan in the Inland Empire. The Plan received its Knox -
Keene license on July 22, 1996,  and commenced operations on September 1, 1996,  in 
Riverside and San Ber nardino Counties.   
 The Plan provides m anaged care health services to Medi -Cal beneficiaries under the 
provision of Welfare and Institutions Code, section 14087.3. The Plan is a public entity, formed as a Joint Powers Agency, and a not -for-profit health pl an. The Plan is 
headquartered in Rancho Cucamonga, California, created by Riverside and San Bernardino Counties as a two- plan Medi -Cal Managed Care model . 
 The Plan provides health care coverage to eligible members i n San Bernardino and 
Riverside Counties as a mixed model Health Maintenance Organization. The Plan’s contract ed provider network consists  of approximately seven Independent Physician 
Associations and 34  hospitals. The Plan al so directly contracts with 1,3 81 primary care 
physicians and 2, 595 specialists.  
 As of July 31,  2023 , the Plan had a total enrollment of 1, 685,464 members.  
      
 
 2 of 10 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
  This report presents the findings of the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) 
medical audit of the Plan for the period of August 1, 2022  through July 31, 2023 . The audit  
was conducted from September 1 8, 2023  through September 29, 202 3. The audit 
consisted of document review, verification studies, and interviews with Plan personnel . 
 An Exit Conference was held on December 6, 2023. The Plan was allowed 15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing 
the draft  audit report findings. On December 20, 2023, the Plan submitted a response to 
address the audit findings.  The results of the DHCS evaluation of the Plan’s response are 
reflected in this report.   The audit evaluated six categories of performance: Utilization Management  (UM) , Case 
Management and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Member’s R ights, 
Quality Management, and Administrative and Organizational Capacity.  
 The prior DHCS medical audit report , issued on February  1, 2023 , (audit period August 1, 
2021 through July 31, 2022) identified deficiencies incorporated in the Corrective Action 
Plan (CAP).  The prior year CAP was not closed at the time of audit ; however, this year’s 
audit reviewed the implementation and effectiveness of the Plan’s proposed corrective 
actions.  
 Findings denoted as repeat findings are uncorrected deficiencies substantially similar to those identified in the previous audit.  
 The summary of findings  by category follows:  
 Category 1 –  Utilization Management  
 The Plan is required to develop, implement, and continuously update and improve, a UM program that ensures appropriate processes are used to review and approve the provision of medically necessary covered services. T he Plan did not ensure continuous updates and 
improvements to the UM program to ensure the provision of medically necessary covered services.  
 The Plan is required to include within its UM program mechanisms to detect overutilization 
of Behavioral Health Treatment (BHT) services.  The Plan’s UM program did not have a 
mechanism to detect over utilization of BHT services.   Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care  
 Review of Category 2 yielded no findings.  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
 
 3 of 10 
 Review of Category 3 yielded no findings.  
 Category 4 –  Member’s Rights  
 The Plan's grievance resolution letters are required to contain a clear and concise explanation of the Plan's decision. The Plan's Quality of Care (QOC) grievance resolution letters did not contain an explanation of the Plan's decision.   Category 5 –  Qual ity Management  
 Review of Category 5 yielded no findings.  
 Category 6 –  Administrative and Organizational Capacity  
 Review of Category 6 yielded no findings.                
 
 4 of 10 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  
  
SCOPE  
 The DHCS , Contract and Enrollment Review Division conducted this audit of the Plan t o 
ascertain that medical services provided to Plan members comply with federal and state 
laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and the state’s Two- Plan Contract.  
 
PROCEDURE  
 The audit was conducted from September 18 , 2023 through September 29, 202 3, for the 
audit period of August 1, 2022 through July 31, 2023. The audit included a review of the 
Plan's policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement  the policies, and 
verification studies to determine the effectiveness of the policies. Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted wit h Plan  personnel .   
 The following verification studies were conducted:  
 Category 1 – Utilization Management   
 Prior Authorization (PA) Requests: 34 medical  (28 standard and six urgent), nine 
pharmacy, and five M ajor Organ Transplant PA requests were reviewed for timeliness, 
consistent application of criteria, appropriateness of review, and communication of results to members and providers.  
 Appeal Process:  Ten (five Seniors and Persons with Disabilities  (SPD)  and five non-SPD) 
PA appeals were reviewed for appropriate and timely adjudication.   
 Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 BHT: 12 medical records were reviewed for compliance with BHT  requirements . 
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 Emergency Service and Family Planning Claims: 24 emergency service claims , including 
four post -stabilization,  and 35 family planning claims were reviewed for appropriate and 
timely adjudication.  
 Non-Emergency Medical Transportation ( NEMT): 30 (five SPD) records were reviewed to 
confirm compliance with NEMT requirements.  
 Non-Medical Transportation (NMT): 25 records were reviewed to confirm compliance with 
NMT requirements.  
 Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 
 5 of 10 
  Grievance Procedures: 16 standard quality of service, three exempt quality of service, 27 
standard QOC , nine SPD QOC , and  ten exempt  QOC  grievance cases were reviewed for 
timely resolution, appropriate response to complainant, and submission to the appropriate level for review .  
 Category 5 –  Quality Management  
 Quality Improvement System: Ten potential  quality  issue  cases  were  reviewed  for timely  
evaluation and effective action taken to address  improvements.  
 Category 6 –  Administrative and Organizational Capacity 
 Fraud, Waste, and Abuse: Ten fraud and abuse cases were reviewed for proper reporting 
of suspected fraud, waste, or abuse to DHCS within the required timeframe.  
 Encounter Data –  Prop osition  56: 36 claims were reviewed for proper reporting of 
complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely encounter data.  
 A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report.  
     
        
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS   
 
PLAN:   Inland Empire Health Plan 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  August 1, 2022 through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT:  September 18 , 2023 through September 29, 2023 
 
 6 of 10 
  
CATEGORY 1 - UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT  
  
1.1  
UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM  
 1.1.1 Utilization Management Program Updates and Improvements  The Plan shall develop, implement, and continuously update and improve, a UM program that ensures appropriate processes are used to review and approve the provision of medically necessary covered services. (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 5(1)) 
 The Plan’s policy, MC_14D Preservice Referral Authorization Process  (revision date 
1/1/2023), state s the Plan ensures decisions based on the medical necessity of 
proposed health care services are consistent with criteria or guidelines that are supported by clinical principles and processes.  
 The Plan’s policy, MED_UM04CC Automated Authorizations (revision date 3/1/2023), state s as part of the weekly UM PA Clinical Quality Assurance Case Audit, UM staff will 
review a selection of auto- authorized services. UM clinical staff will review clinical 
documentation to ensure that services were authorized appropriately. UM clinical staff will flag any issues identified during their review, including if a service should be considered for removal from the auto- authorization process. Findings from these 
retrospective reviews are forwarded to a Senior Medical Director for review. If the service should be removed from the auto- authorization process, UM clinical staff will 
submit a request to update the rules to remove the service in question. Recommendations to add, remove, or otherwise revise auto- authorization rules are 
presented to the UM s ubcommittee for review and approval on a quarterly basis.  
 Finding: The Plan did not ensure continuous updates and improvements to the UM 
program to ensure the provision of medically necessary covered services.   A verification study of PAs  revealed the following procedures were auto approved 
without an appropriate diagnosis for medical necessity. 
• Biofeedback training of pelvic muscles was approved in three cases for upper 
extremity diagnoses.  
• Gait training, walking exercises, were approved in three cases for upper 
extremity diagnoses.  
 During the interview, the Plan acknowledged potential overutilization of biofeedback training and conducted a focus review where 12 of 20 cases did not meet medical 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS   
 
PLAN:  Inland Empire Health Plan 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  August 1, 2022 through July 31, 2023  
DATES  OF AUDIT:  September 18 , 2023 through September 29, 2023  
 
 7 of 10 
 necessity. The internal audit findings were discussed and documented in the July 2023,  
UM subcommittee meeting notes and no act ion was taken. The Plan did not follow 
internal policy. Physical therapy authorizations were  the second highest category of 
approved PA, and the Plan was unaware that gait training was approved for upper 
extremity diagnosis and agreed that it was not appropriate despite being auto approved.   The Plan’s quality improvement for its UM program is ineffective since the Plan did not implement its policies to conduct continuous improvement of issues identified through its monitoring process.  
 Without ensuring medical necessity is met for approved procedures, there is potential of increased risk for patient harm and risk for potential f raud, waste, and abuse.  
 Recommendation:  Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure 
continuous updates and improvements are made to the UM program for the provision of medically necessary covered services . 
 1.1.2 Mechanisms to Detect Overutili zation of Behavioral Health Treatment 
Services  
 The Plan shall include, within the UM program, mechanisms to detect both under and over utilization of health care services.  (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 5(5))  
 For members under the age of 21, Plans are required to provide and cover, or arrange, as appropriate, all medically necessary Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic, and Treatment  services, i ncluding BHT services, when they are covered under Medicaid, 
regardless of whether California’s Medicaid State Plan covers such services for adults. 
Additionally, Plans must comply with mental health parity requirements when providing BHT services. ( All Plan Letter ( APL) 19-014 Responsibilities for Behavioral Health 
Treatment Coverage for M embers under the age of 21 (11/12/2019))  
 The Plan’s Policy,  Med_UM5.e Over and Under Utilization Tracking and Reporting 
Policy (revision date 6/1/22) , state s that the Plan has mechanisms to detect over and 
underutilization of services.  The Plan collects, reports, and analyzes medical and 
behavioral health UM data for Medi -Cal members. Such data includes internally 
generated reports designed to assess and detect potential over and underutilization of services as well as individual UM trend reports. This policy also states that the UM 
subcommittee establishes measurable action plans (e.g., special audits) to more closely monitor physicians or providers that exceed the established standards and/or thresholds.   
 The Plan’s Policy, Guideline #UM_BH 08: Behavioral Health Treatment Authorization 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS   
 
PLAN:  Inland Empire Health Plan 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  August 1, 2022 through July 31, 2023  
DATES  OF AUDIT:  September 18 , 2023 through September 29, 2023  
 
 8 of 10 
 Guidelines (rev ision date 11/1/22) , states the Plan will cover medically necessary BHT 
evaluation for eligible beneficiaries under the age of 21 years . The Plan’s Policy, IEHP 
Behavioral Health Manual Med_BH 1.a ( revision date 8/1/2022) , states the UM 
behavioral health program does not impose quantitative or non- quantitative treatment 
limitations to its timelines and processes more stringently on plan- covered mental health 
and substance use disorder services than are imposed on medical/surgical services.  
 Finding:  The P lan’s UM program did not have a mechanism to detect over utilization of 
BHT services.  
 The Plan did not furnish documentation and/or reports supporting implementation of its policy to collect, report, and analyze behavioral health UM data for over utilization.  
 During the interview, the Plan acknowledged not having an effective mechanism to monitor for overutilization of BHT services  since no quantity limits are placed if it does 
not exceed threshold guidelines when a member has a medical necessity diagnosis.   
 Without effective mechanisms to detect over utilization of BHT services, the Plan is unable to prevent possible fraud, waste, and abuse.  
 Recommendation: Develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure the 
Plan’s UM program has an effective monitoring mechanism to detect overutilization of BHT services.  
  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS   
 
PLAN:   Inland Empire Health Plan 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  August 1, 2022 through July 31, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT:  September 18 , 2023 through September 29, 2023 
 
 9 of 10 
  
CATEGORY 4 – MEMBER’S RIGHT  
  
4.1  
GRIEVANCE SYSTEM  
 4.1.1  Quality of Care Resolution Letters 
 The Plan is required to maintain a Member Grievance System in accordance with California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 28, sections 1300.68 and 1300.68.01, CCR, Title 22, section 53858, and Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR) , Title 42, section 
438.402. (Contract Exhibit A, Attachment 14(1))  
 The Plan’s grievance resolution and written response is required to contain a clear and concise explanation of the Plan’s decision. (CCR, Title 28, section 1300.68(d)(3))  
 The Plan’s written resolution must contain a clear and concise explanation of the Pl an’s 
decision. (APL 21-011) 
 Grievance means an expression of dissatisfaction about any matter other than an adverse benefit determination. Grievances may include, but are not limited to, the QOC  
or services provided, and aspects of interpersonal relationships such as rudeness of a provider or employee, or failure to respect the enrollee's rights regardless of whether remedial action is requested. Grievance includes an enrollee's right to dispute an extension of time proposed by the Managed Care Organization, Prepaid Inpatient Health Plan or Prepaid Ambulatory Health Plan to make an authorization decision. 
(CFR, Title 42, section 438.400(b))  
 Plan policy, Med_Grv 2 Quality of Care Grievance (revision date: 1/1/23),  state s 
members receive letters that contain clear and concise explanation of the Plan’s 
decision. This policy cites the California Evidence Code section 1157 as the basis why 
QOC case outcomes are privileged and protected from disclosure, including grievance resolution letter disclosure.  
Finding:  The Plan’s QOC grievance resolution letters did not contain an explanation of 
the Plan’s decision.   
The Plan did not implement its internal policy, nor did it comply with APL 21- 011 
requirements, per the verification study to determine compliance with grievance resolution requirements. One hundred percent  of the verification samples, seven out of 
seven, of the QOC grievances did not contain specific details regarding the outcome of 
the QOC investigations . The Plan's template letter cit ed California  Evidence Code 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS   
 
PLAN:  Inland Empire Health Plan 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  August 1, 2022 through July 31, 2023  
DATES  OF AUDIT:  September 18 , 2023 through September 29, 2023  
 
 10 of 10 
 section 1157 as the basis for why details could not be shared. This was confirmed 
during the Plan interview.  
During the interview, the Plan acknowledged using its revised template for grievance resolution letters that  lacked an explanation of the Plan’s final resolution addressing the 
member’s grievance.  
 As a corrective action for the prior year’s audit finding, 4.1 QOC  Resolution Letters, the 
Plan made changes to its template letter in March 2023. However, the revised grievance resolution letter template still did not explain the Plan’s final resolution to address the member’s grievance. The Plan’s template for grievance resolution letters incorrec tly applied the Peer Review Protection under the California Evidence Code 
section 1157. California Evidence Code section 1157 does not apply to the provision of a clear and concise explanation of the Plan’s decision in resolving the member’s grievance. Section 1157 of the California Evidence Code protects proceedings and 
records of peer review bodies from discovery in formal court proceedings. Discovery refers to a formal exchange of evidentiary information between parties to a pending action before the Supreme Court, a court of appeal, or superior court ( Arnett v. Dal 
Cielo (1996) 14 Cal.4th 4, 24). A grievance is not a proceeding before a superior court, 
nor does the grievance process contain a formal exchange of evidentiary information between parties ( CFR, Title 42, section 438.400(b); Arnett v. Dal Cielo, supra, 14 
Cal.4th at p. 24).   
 Without an explanation of the Plan’s final decision of QOC grievances contained within resolution letters, members are unable to make well informed decisions regarding their healthcare, which can lead to inappropriate choi ces and possible member harm.  
 This is a repeat finding from the prior year 2022 annual DHCS audit, 4.1 Quality of Care Resolution Letters.  
 Recommendation: Revise and implement policies and procedures and grievance resolution template letters to ensure QOC grievance resolution letters include an explanation of the Plan’s decision.  
  
     
         
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION 
RANCHO CUCAMONGA SECTION 
 
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
 
  INLAND EMPIRE HEALTH PLAN  
   STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES  
 
2023  
 
Contract Number:   
  
03-75797  
 
Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit:     
Report Issued:  
 August 1, 202 2  
    Through July 31, 2023  September 18 , 2023  
    Through September 29, 2023  January 5, 2024  
 
     
    TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. 1 
 Il. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ................................................... 2 
   
 
1 of 2 
 I. INTRODUCTION  
  This report represents the result of the audit of Inland Empire Health Plan (Plan) State 
Supported Services Contract No. 03- 75797. The State Supported Services C ontract 
covers abortion services with the Plan.  
  
The audit  was conducted from September 18 , 2023  through September 29, 2023,  for the 
audit period of August 1, 2022  through July 31, 2023 . The audit consisted of document 
review of materials provided by the Plan, a verification study, and interviews with the Plan’s administration and staff.   
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on December 6, 2023. There were no 
deficiencies found for the audit  period of the Plan’s State Supported Services.  
   
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN:  Inland Empire Health Plan 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  August 1, 2022 through July 31, 2023  
DATES  OF AUDIT:  September 18 , 2023 through September 29, 2023  
 
2 of 2 
   
STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS  
 The Plan agrees to provide, or arrange to provide, to eligible members the following State Supported Services: Current Procedural Coding System Codes 59840 through 59857 and Health Care Finance Administration Common Procedure Coding System Codes X1516, X1518, X7724, X7726, and Z0336. These codes are subject to change upon the Department of Health Care Services  implementation of the Health Insurance 
Portability  and Accountability Act of 1996 electronic transaction and code sets 
provisions. (Contract, Exhibit A, (1))  
 Plan Policy , MC_ P-13 State Supported Services, Abortion (revision date: 1/1/22 ), state d 
abortion is covered by the Medi -Cal program as a physician service. Members have the 
right to access abortion services through a contracted or non- contracted qualified 
provider and services are generally rendered on an outpatient basis. Additionally, abortion services and related supplies do not require prior authorization. However, if the 
abortion services require inpatient hospitalization, the inpatient facility services (only) require authorization.  
 Review of the Plan’s State Supported Services claims processing system and abortion services billing procedure codes yielded no findings for the audit period.  
 RECOMMENDATION:  None.  
   
