CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION – SAN DIEGO AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
SENIOR CARE ACTION NETWORK  
HEALTH PLAN  
 
2023  
 
Contract Number:  
  
07-65712  
Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit:     
Report Issued:  
 March 1, 2022  
  Through 
February 28, 2023 
 
June 5, 2023 
  Through 
June 16, 2023  
 September 27, 2023 
 
TABLE  OF CONTENTS  
    
I. INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................. 1 
 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................................................. 2  
 
III. SCOPE/AUDIT  PROCEDURES  ....................................................... 3  
 
IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT  FINDINGS  
Category  1 – Utilization  Management  ............................................... 5  
Category  4 – Member’s Rights  ......................................................... 7  
 
 
1 of 10  I. INTRODUCTION 
  Senior Care Action Network (SCAN) Health Plan (Plan) commenced operations in Long Beach,  California  in 1977 as a non-profit  Multipurpose Senior  Services  Program. The Plan 
received its full service Knox Keene license in 1984. The Plan contracted with California Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) to provide health care services as a Dual Eligible Special Needs Plan in 1985.  
 
The Plan has the only Fully Integrated Dual Eligible Special Needs Plan (FIDE- SNP) 
Contract in California and provides this product line to seniors in Riverside, San 
Bernardino, and Los Angeles C ounties. In January 2023, DHCS granted the Plan a 
FIDE- SNP Contract to provide health care services to dually eligible beneficiaries in San 
Diego County.  The Plan administers its FIDE -SNP Contract to dually eligible seniors, 
entitled to both Medicare (Title XVIII) and Medi -Cal (Title XIX), for the  provision  of both 
Medicare and Medi -Cal services integrat ed and coordinated through one Plan.  
 
As of March  2023,  the Plan had a total enrollment  of 263,897 Medicare Advantage 
members, of which 21,668 were enrolled as dual eligible members.  
2 of 10  II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
  This report presents the findings of the DHCS medical audit of the Plan for the period of 
March 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023. The audit was conducted from June 5, 2023 through June 16,  2023.  The audit  consisted of document  review,  verification  studies,  and 
interviews with Plan personnel.  
 The audit  evaluated six categories  of performance:  Utilization  Management  (UM), Case 
Management and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Member’s Rights, 
Quality Management, and A dministrative and Organizational Capacity.  
 The prior DHCS medical  audit  report  issued on August 23, 2022, for the audit  period of 
March  1, 2021 through February 28, 2022,  identified deficiencies , which were addressed 
in the Corrective Action Plan (CAP) dated May 4, 2023.  This year’s audit included 
review of documents to determine implementation and effectiveness of the Plan’s CAP.    
 The summary  of findings  by category  is as follows:  
 Category 1 – Utilization  Management  
 
Category 1 covers requirements and procedures for the UM  program, including prior 
authorization review, M edical Director and medical decisions, the delegation of UM, and 
the appeal process.  
 The Plan is required to review Medi -Cal coverage when Medicare c overage has been 
exhausted or denied. The Plan did not include review of Medi -Cal authorization criteria for 
covered services.  
 Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 Category 4 includes requirements and procedures to establish and maintain a grievance system, and to protect members’ rights by properly reporting suspected or actual breaches or security incidents.    
 The Plan is required to send acknowledgment of grievance receipt to members  within the 
required timeframe. The Plan did not send notice of acknowledgement to members within the required five- calendar -day timeframe.  
 The Plan is required to include 18 non- English languages identified by the U nited States  
Department of Health and Human Services and DHCS in its Language Assistance Tagline attac hment. The Plan did not include two non- English languages, Mien and Ukrainian, in the 
Language Assistance Tagline attachment found in the Member Handbook and member notices.  
    
3 of 10  III. SCOPE/AUDIT  PROCEDURES  
  
SCOPE  
 
This audit was conducted by the DHCS Contract and Enrollment Review Division to ascertain that the medical services provided to Plan members comply with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and the State Contract.  
 
PROCEDURE  
 The audit was conducted from June 5, 2023 through June 16, 2023, for the audit period 
March 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023. The audit included a review of the Plan's 
policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement the policies, and verification studies to determine the effectiveness of the policies. Documents were 
reviewed and interviews  were  conducted with Plan administrators and key personnel.  
 The following  verification  studies  were  conducted:  
 Category 1 – Utilization  Management  
 Prior Authorization Requests: 20 medical prior authorization approvals and denials were 
reviewed for timeliness,  consistent  application  of criteria, appropriate  review,  and 
communication of results to members and providers.  
 Appeals  Process: 18 medical  appeals  were  reviewed for appropriate and timely 
adjudication.  
 Delegated Prior  Authorization Requests:  14 medical  prior authorization denials  were 
reviewed for timeliness, consistent application of criteria, appropriate review, and communication of results to members and providers.  
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 Non-Emergency Medical Transportation (NEMT)  and Non- Medical Transportation 
(NMT): five  NEMT  and ten NMT  records  were  reviewed  to confirm  compliance  with 
transportation requirements.  
 Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 Grievance Procedures:  56 standard grievances  (29 quality of care and 27 quality of 
service ), 14 exempt  grievances , and 25 call  inquiries were reviewed for timely 
resolution, classification, appropriate response to complainant, and submission to 
appropriate level for review.  
4 of 10  Category 5 – Quality  Management  
 Quality Improvement System : 14 potential  quality  incident  files were  reviewed  for 
proper decision- making and effective actions taken to address needed quality 
improvements.  
 Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational  Capacity  
 Fraud and Abuse: 11 f raud and abuse cases were reviewed for processing and reporting 
requirements.  
 Encounter Data: Five encounter data records were reviewed for complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely encounter data submissions.  
 A description of the findings  for each category  is contained in the following  report.  
5 of 10      
  COMPLIANCE  AUDIT  FINDINGS   
PLAN:  Senior  Care  Action Network (SCAN)  Health Plan 
AUDIT  PERIOD: March 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023  
DATES OF AUDIT:  June 5, 2023 through June 16, 2023 
  
CATEGORY 1 – UTILIZATION  MANAGEMENT  
 
1.3 PRIOR AUTHORIZATION APPEAL PROCESS  
 1.3.1 Appeal Reviews of  Medi -Cal Benefits  
 The Plan shall have a grievance and appeal system that meet the standards described in Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 42, section 422.629. (Contract Amendment 
A25, Exhibit A, Attachment 14, Provision 2)   The Plan shall develop, implement, and continuously update and improve, a UM program that ensures appropriate processes are used to review and approve the provision of medical care services through establishment of criteria for approving, modifying, deferring, or denying requested services. (Contract  Amendment A16, Exhibit A, 
Attachment 5 (1)(D))  
 A beneficiary with other health coverage is not entitled to receive health care benefits and services under the Medi -Cal schedule of benefits until the other health care coverage has 
been exhausted or denied. (California Code of Regulations  (CCR) , Title 22, section 
50761)  
 If the Plan expects to issue a partially or fully adverse medical necessity decision based on the initial review of the request, the Plan’s determination must be reviewed by a physician or other appropriate health care professional with expertise in the field of medicine or health care that is appropriate for the services at issue, including knowledge of Medicare and Medicaid coverage criteria, before the Plan issues the determination 
decision. (CFR , Title 42,  section 422.629(k)(3))  
 Finding: The Plan did not ensure its appeal process for dual eligible members included a 
review of criteria for covered services under the Medi -Cal program.   
 The Plan’s policy, Member Appeal Process for Medi -Cal Only Benefits (published March 
2023) , states that the member or member’s representative will be informed of the M edical 
Director’s decision by mailed correspondence. However, this  policy does not describe the 
Plan’s process to cite Medi -Cal criteria  in decision letters when there is non- coverage by 
Medicare.  
 A sample of 18 appeal cases were selected for a verification study. For three of 18 verification study cases, dual eligible members appealed prior authorization denials for 
compression stockings, a pneumatic compressor, and a power operated vehicle. The Plan’s delegate initially denied these authorization requests based solely on Medicare  
6 of 10      
  COMPLIANCE  AUDIT  FINDINGS   
PLAN:  Senior  Care  Action Network (SCAN)  Health Plan 
AUDIT  PERIOD:  March 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023  
DATES OF AUDIT:  June 5, 2023 through June 16, 2023 
  criteria without a subsequent Medi -Cal criteria review. Furthermore, during the appeal 
process for these three samples, the Plan upheld the delegate’s denials based on Medicare criteria alone without conducting a Medi -Cal criteria review. The Plan’s notices 
of resolution informed members of its decision to uphold prior authorization denials  that 
only utilized Medicare criteria as a basis . 
 In a written response, the Plan stated that the three verification study appeal samples did not require a Medi -Cal criteria review.  However, Medi -Cal authorization criteria exists for 
these services denied by the Plan.  Whether the Plan upholds or overturns a denial , 
criteria should be cited in decision letters  to assist members in navigating their Medi -Cal 
coverage benefits .  
 When the Plan does not review for Medi -Cal criteria during the appeals process for dual 
eligible members, this can lead to denials , delays in obtaining covered and medically 
necessary services,  and may result in member harm.  
 Recommendation:  Revise  and implement policies and procedures to ensure the Plan’s 
appeal process for dual eligible members includes a review of criteria for covered services under the Medi -Cal program.  
     
                   
7 of 10      
  COMPLIANCE  AUDIT  FINDINGS   
PLAN:  Senior  Care  Action Network (SCAN)  Health Plan 
AUDIT  PERIOD: March 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023  
DATES OF AUDIT:  June 5, 2023 through June 16, 2023 
  
CATEGORY 4 – MEMBER’S RIGHTS 
 
4.1 GRIEVANCE SYSTEM  
 4.1.1 Timely Grievance Acknowledgment  
 
The Plan shall provide written acknowledgement  within five -calendar -days of receipt of 
the grievance. The acknowledgement letter shall advise the member that the grievance has been received, the date of the receipt, and provide the name, telephone number, and address of the representative who may be contacted about the gri evance. (Contract  
Amendment A25, Exhibit A, Attachment 14, Provision 3 ) 
 The Plan must provide written acknowledgement to the member that is dated and postmarked within five- calendar -days of receipt of the grievance. (A ll Plan Letter  21-011) 
 The Plan’s policy GA -0033, Medi -Cal Grievance Resolution Process (published 
November 2022) , states that written acknowledgment of the grievance request will be 
provided to the member or the member’s authorized representative within five- calendar -
days.  
 Finding:  The Plan did not send acknowledgement of grievance receipt notices to 
members within five -calendar -days.  
 The Plan’s policy , GA-0033, states that the Grievance and Appeal Department (GAD) 
Coordinator will validate the information or documentation received, the member’s eligibility, and request additional information as needed. The GAD Coordinator will also create and mail the acknowledgment letter to the member or member’s authorized representative within five- calendar -days from receipt of the request. Additionally, GAD will 
perform monitoring and oversight of the process to ensure the receipt, review, and resolutions of grievances. Prio rity metric reports , such as the GAD Monthly Operation 
Report,  regarding timeliness of all grievances will be submitted to the Compliance 
Department.  
 A verification study of grievances found that the Plan did not have timely acknowledgement letters. Five of 29 quality of care and three of 27 quality of service 
grievance samples had acknowledgement letters sent between six to 25- calendar -days.  
 In an interview, the Plan stated that an unanticipated increase in grievances led to acknowledgement letters sent  beyond five- calendar -days. An analysis  of the Plan’s 
grievance log found that grievance volume increased nearly 34 percent  during the audit  
 
8 of 10      
  COMPLIANCE  AUDIT  FINDINGS   
PLAN:  Senior  Care  Action Network (SCAN)  Health Plan 
AUDIT  PERIOD:  March 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023  
DATES OF AUDIT:  June 5, 2023 through June 16, 2023 
  period. The untimely acknowledgement letters were attributed to an increase in grievances  and a shortage of staff . A review of the organization al chart submitted by the 
Plan, shows  four vacancies in the ir GAD.  
 Additionally, the Plan’s database system does not notify Plan staff if acknowledgment letters are sent to members. Review of the GAD Monthly Operation Report showed that the Plan tracks grievance rates, however it does not include tracking of timely acknowledgements.  
 When the Plan does not send gr ievance acknowledgment let ters to its members within 
the five- calendar -day time limit, members may not know if their grievances are processed 
in a timely manner , and it may delay their ability to address potential quality of care 
issues.  
 Recommendation:  Implement policies and procedures  to ensure the Plan acknowledges  
dually eligible members’ Medi -Cal grievances within five -calendar days of the grievance 
receipt.  
       
                   
9 of 10      
  COMPLIANCE  AUDIT  FINDINGS   
PLAN:  Senior  Care  Action Network (SCAN)  Health Plan 
AUDIT  PERIOD:  March 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023  
DATES OF AUDIT:  June 5, 2023 through June 16, 2023 
  
4.2 CULTURAL AND LINGUISTIC SERVICES  
 4.2.1 Language Assistance Taglines 
 The Plan shall have a Cultural and Linguistic Services Program that incorporates the requirements of CCR,  Title 22,  section 53876. The Plan shall monitor, evaluate, and take 
effective action to address any needed improvement in the del ivery of culturally and 
linguistically appropriate services. (Contract Amendment A16, Exhibit A, Attachment 9, Provision  12 & 13)  
 The top 15 non- English languages spoken by L imited English Proficiency (LEP)  
individuals in California, as identified by the US Department of Health and Human 
Services Office for Civil Rights  in 2016, are Arabic, Armenian, Cambodian, Chinese, 
Farsi, Hindi, Hmong, Japanese, Korean, Punjabi, Russian, Spanish, Tagalog, Thai, and Vietnamese. Although state law only requires that Plans use taglines for the top 15 non-English languages in California, DHCS  also requires  the addition of taglines  in Laotian, 
Ukrainian and Mien. ( APL 21 -004, Standards for Determining Threshold Languages, 
Nondiscrimination Requirements, and Language Assistance Services ) 
 Finding: The Plan’s Language Assistance Taglines excluded two non- English languages,  
Mien and Ukrainian.   
 A review of the Member Handbook  and all grievance and appeal  letters  found an 
accompanying Language Assistance Tagline attachment excluding two non- English 
languages , Mien and Ukrainian.  
 The Plan utilizes Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (C MS) guidelines instead of DHCS 
APL 21 -004 standards in determining the languages to include in the Language 
Assistance Tagline attachment.  The Plan acknowledged it received approval from DHCS 
regarding its Languag e Assistance Tagline attachment. However,  review of the 
Submission Review Form completed by the DHCS M anaged Care Operations Division , 
Contract Oversight Branch only demonstrates an approval of the Plan’s  policies impacted 
by APL 21- 004, titled Access and Availability to Linguistic Services  and Discri mination 
Grievance Process . The Submission Review Form  excluded any approval for the use of a 
Language Assistance Tagline attachment per CMS guidelines.  
       
10 of 10      
  COMPLIANCE  AUDIT  FINDINGS   
PLAN:  Senior  Care  Action Network (SCAN)  Health Plan 
AUDIT  PERIOD:  March 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023  
DATES OF AUDIT:  June 5, 2023 through June 16, 2023 
  When the Plan does not provide informing materials in all required 18 non- English 
Language Assistance Taglines, LEP members who require language assistance services may not know how to access them and resolve issues when they arise.  
 Recommendation: Revise  the Language Assistance Tagline template to include all 18 
non-English languages per APL 21- 004.
 
