    
California Department of Health Care Services                                                                    
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division    
P.O. Box 997413 | Sacramento , CA | 95899-7413  
MS 4400  | Phone ( 916) 449-5000  | www. dhcs.ca.gov  State of California  
Gavin Newsom, Governor   
California Health and Human Services Agency  
 
 December 29, 2023  
  Annabel Vaughn, Director   
Regulatory Affairs & Compliance              
CalOptima  
505 City Parkway West  
Orange, CA   92868  
  RE:  Department of Health Care Services Medical Audit     
 
 
Dear Ms. Vaughn : 
 The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), Audits and Investigations Division conducted an on- site Medical Audit of CalOptima , a Managed Care Plan (MCP), from 
February 27, 2023 through March 10, 2023 .  The audit covered the period of February 
1, 2022  through January 31, 2023.  
  
The items were  evaluated and DHCS accepts the MCP’s submitted Corrective Action 
Plan (CAP). The CAP is hereby closed. The enclosed documents will serve as DHCS’ final respons e to the MCP’s CAP. Closure of this CAP does not halt any other 
processes in place between DHCS and the MCP regarding the deficiencies in the audit report or elsewhere, nor does it preclude the DHCS from taking additional actions it deems necessary regardi ng these deficiencies.  
 Please be advised that in accordance with Health & Safety Code Section 1380(h) and the Public Records Act, the final audit report and final CAP remediation document (final Attachment A) will be made available on the DHCS website and to the public upon 
request.  
  
If you have any questions, please reach out to CAP Compliance personnel.  
 Sincerely,  
 [Signature on file]
 
 Lyubov Poonka, Chief  
Audit Monitoring Unit  
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division 
  Department of Health Care Services Department of Health Care Services   Enclosures:  Attachment A (CAP Response Form)  
 cc:      Stacy Nguyen, Chief  
Managed Care Monitoring Branch  
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division Department of Health Care Services  
 Joshua Hunter , Lead Analyst   
Audit Monitoring Unit  
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division Department of Health Care Services  
 
Diana Voong, Contract Manager  
 Medi -Cal Managed Care Division 
Department of Health Care Services  
  
ATTACHME NT A 
Corrective Action Plan  Response Form  
 
Plan :  CalOptima                Review Period:  2/1/22 – 1/31/23  
 Audit  Type:  Medical Audit   and S tate Supported S ervices          On-site Review:  2/27/23 – 3/10/23  
 
 
 MCP s are required to provide a CAP and respond to all documented deficiencies  included in the medical  audit report within 30 calendar days , unless an alternative 
timeframe is indicated in the CAP Request letter.  MCPs are requ ired to submit the CAP  in Word format that will reduce turnaround time for DHCS to complete its 
review.  According to ADA requirement, the document should be at least 12 pt.  
 The CAP submission must include a written statement identifying the deficiency and describing the plan of action taken to cor rect the deficiency, and the 
operational results of that action.  The MCP shall directly address each deficiency component by c ompleting the following columns provided for MCP response: 1. 
Finding Number and Summary , 2. Action Taken, 3. Implementation Documentation, and 4. Completion/Expected Completion Date. The MCP will be required to 
include project timeline with milestones in a separate document for each finding. Supporting documentation should accompany each Action Taken. If supporting documentation is missing, the MCP submission will not be accepted.  For policies and other documentation that have been revised, please highlight the new 
relevant text, and include additional detail such as title of the document, page number, revision date, etc. in the column “Supporting Documentation” to assist 
DHCS in identifying any updates that were made by the plan.   For deficiencies that require short -term corrective action, implementation should be completed within 
30 calendar days. For deficiencies that may be reasonably determined to require long- term corrective action for a period longer than 30 days to completely remedy 
or operationalize, the MCP is to indicate that it has initiated remedial action and is on the way towards achieving an accept able level of compliance.  In those 
instances, the MCP will be required in addition to the above steps, to include the date when full compliance will be achieved.   Policies and procedures submitted 
during the CAP process must still be sent to the MCP’s Contract Manager for review and approval, as applicable in accordance with exis ting requirements.  
 Please note, DHCS expects the plan to take swift action to implement improvement interventions as proposed in the CAP, theref ore DHCS encourages 
all remediation efforts to be in place no later than month 6 of the CAP, unless prior approval for an extended implementation effort is granted by DHCS.  
 DHCS will maintain close communication with the MCP throughout the CAP process and provide technical assistance to ensure the MCP provides sufficient 
documentation to correct deficiencies.  Depending on the volume and complexity of deficiencies identified, DHCS may require the MCP to provide weekly updates, as applicable.  
 
  
 - 2 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken   
Supporting Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)  
DHCS Comments  
2. Case Management and Coordination of Care   
2.1.1 Provision of Initial 
Health Assessment  
 The Plan did not ensure that an IHA was performed by the member’s PCP, perinatal care providers, and non-physician mid- level 
practitioners.  1. Internal Policy GG.1613  
Internal policy GG.1613 Initial Health Appointment (IHA) was revised  to align with APL 2 2-024 
Population Health Management Policy Guide and clarify expectations of providers and delegated health networks  
(Attachment 1) . 
 2. Internal System Update The Plan has been reviewing,  
validating,  and updating the IHA 
logic to only include a member’s 
PCP, perinatal care provider, or  
non-physician mid -level practitioner  
in the IHA reporting.  
  
3. Monthly Monitoring  
The Plan will develop and 
implement a process for monthly monitoring to ensure the IHA is  only 
being completed by the member’s 
PCP, perinatal care provider, or a 
non-physician mid -level practitioner . 
The Plan’s  Population Health 
Management (PHM) department 
will review IHA completion reports Attachment 1_GG.1613 _Initial 
Health Appointment  
        N/A 
 
 
     N/A 
     
   
 1. March 1 , 2023  
    
 
    
2. Anticipated to be completed by October 31, 2023  
    
 3. Anticipated to be completed by November 30, 2023  
     
 The following documentation 
supports the MCP’s efforts to correct this finding:  
 POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
 • Updated P&P, “GG.1613: Initial Health Appointment ” 
states  that an IHA shall be 
performed, within a primary care medical setting, by the Member’s  Assigned Primary 
Care Practitioner (PCP), Perinatal care Provider during a Member’s pregnancy, Non- physician 
Mid-Level Practitioner such 
as a Nurse Practitioner (NP), Certified Nurse Midwife, Physician Assistant (PA); or PCP in training. (GG.1613 Initial Health Appointment).  
 
• Excel Spreadsheet, “IHA Performance by Date Range” and Help Desk 
Ticket, “ Ticket Closure for 
IHA” as evidence that the 
 - 3 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken   
Supporting Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)  
DHCS Comments  
on a monthly basis to validate a 
sample of new members for whom an IHA is indicated as completed to 
ensure that the provider is not a specialist.  
 4. Reporting to Committee  
The Plan has begun providing IHA performance reports to the Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee (QIHEC, formerly QIC) on a quarterly basis. The Plan submits a sample of QIHEC meeting slides and meeting minutes from the January , February,  and 
May 2023 QIHEC meetings  
(Attachments 2 -7). 
         5. Provider and Delegate Education  
The Plan increased awareness of 
IHA requirements by training  
     Attachment 2_QIC Meeting Presentation _01-17-23, Page 40 
 
Attachment 3_QIC Meeting Minutes_01- 17-23, Page 14 
 Attachment 4_QIC Meeting IHA 
Follow- up _02-14-23, Page 1  
 Attachment 5_ QIC Meeting Minutes_02- 14-23, Page 20 
 
Attachment 6_QIHEC 
Presentation _05-09-23, Page 1  
 Attachment 7_QIHEC Meeting 
Minutes_05- 09-23, Page 16 
   
Attachment 8_Family Choice JOM 
Packet_04- 12-23, Page 22 
  
     
 4. January 17, 2023  
           
 
     
  5. August 30, 2023  MCP has  completed their 
internal system update. The MCP has updated and validated the logic for IHA completion reports to include only the following provider types: 1) Internal medicine, 2) Pediatrics, 3) Obstetrics/gynecology, 4) Fami ly practice, 5) Perinatal 
care providers, 6) Nurse practitioners, physician assistants and PCPs in training. (IHA Performance by Date Range Template, Ticket Closure for IHA ). 
 TRAINING  
 
• PowerPoint Presentation, “Initial Health Appointment” (07/12/23) and “CalOptima Health Community Network Virtual Meeting Q2 2023” (06/13/23) as evidence  that 
the MCP conducted training on IHA requirements and completion rates to providers 
and delegated hea lth 
 - 4 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken   
Supporting Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)  
DHCS Comments  
CalOptima Health providers and 
delegated Health Networks. The Plan will continue to provide training opportunities to providers and the delegated health networks on a regular basis. The Plan submits a sample of trainings that were completed (Attachments 7 -11). Attachment 9_CalOptima Health 
Community Network Meeting, 
Page 70  
 
Attachment 10_Q22023_ 
CalOptima  Health  Community 
Network  Virtual Meeting_06- 13-23 
 
Attachment 11_Continuing Medical 
Education ( CME )-Continuing 
Education ( CE) Workshop 
Flyer _07-12-23 
 
Attachment 12_CME _Initial Health 
Appointment IHA  networks. (CME_Initial 
Health Appointment IHA, CalOptima Health CHCN Virtual Meeting).  
 MONITORING AND OVERSIGHT  
 • “Quality Improvement Committee (QIC) Meeting Presentation” (January 2023, May 2023) and “QIC Meeting Minutes” (January 2023, May 2023) as evidence that the 
MCP’s  QIC is reviewing the 
IHA completion rates.  The 
MCP is providing  IHA 
performance reports to the Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee (QIHEC, formerly QIC) on a quarterly basis. (QIC Meeting Presentation, QIC Meeting Minutes).  
 
• Excel Spreadsheet, “Provider Taxonomy Validation Log”  (August 2023 
– October 2023) as evidence 
 - 5 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken   
Supporting Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)  
DHCS Comments  
that the MCP has 
implemented a monitoring process to track th at an IHA 
was performed by the 
member’s primary care providers, perinatal care providers, and non- physician 
mid-level practitioners.  On a 
monthly basis, the MCP will take a sample of at least ten members with records indicating IHA completion and verifying that the IHA was completed by an appropriate provider type (PCP, perinatal car e 
provider, or a non- physician 
mid-level practitioner).  
(Provider Taxonomy Validation Log).  
 The corrective action plan for finding 2.1.1 is accepted.  
     
 
 - 6 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken   
Supporting Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)  
DHCS Comments  
2.2.1 Performance of 
Pediatric Risk Stratification Process  
 The Plan did not ensure that members who did not have medical utilization data, claims processing data history, or other assessments or survey information available for PRSP were automatically categorized as high risk until further assessment data was gathered to make an additional ri sk determination.  1. Internal Policy GG.1330  
The Plan’s  Case Management (CM) 
department did not need to update CalOptima Health policy GG.1330 as the requirement is outlined in Section III .A.2 (Attachment 1).  
 2. Internal System Update The Plan updated t he technical 
specifications for the  Whole Child 
Model (WCM) Pediatric Risk Stratification to reflect the regulatory requirements  
(Attachments 2 & 3) .
  
 
 3. Quarterly  Monitoring:    
The Plan’s CM department developed quarterly i nternal 
auditing to ensure compliance with regulatory process of the Whole Child Model (WCM) Pediatric Risk Stratification  (Attachment s 4 & 5) .  
The monitoring is to confirm the 
logic implementation and accuracy of risk determination.   The Plan also 
submits the CM Tracking 
dashboard (Attachment 6)  which 
indicates  the auditing is scheduled 
quarterly. T he Plan notes that  Attachment 1_ GG.1330_Case 
Management - California 
Children’s Services Progr am_Whole -Child Model_07-
01-21 
 
 Attachment 2_WCM PRS 
Technical Specifications Update (Work Order)  
 Attachment 3_Whole Child Model 
(WCM) Risk Stratification  
_Technical Specifications  
  Attachment 4_Q2_PRSP Validation _05-11-2023 
 Attachment 5_Q3_PRSP Validation _07-11-2023 
 Attachment 6_CM_Tracking Dashboard  
     1. N/A 
      2. July 7, 2023  
        3. May 11, 2023  
            The following documentation 
supports the MCP’s efforts to correct this finding:  
 
POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
 MCP’s current policy GG.1330 Case Management -  California 
Children’s Services Program/ Whole- Child Model  correctly 
states “ For Members for which 
medical utilization data, claims processing data, or other 
assessments or  
survey information is not available, CalOptima shall automatically categorize such Member as  high- risk until 
CalOptima is able to gather further assessment data to make an additional risk
 
Determination."  (Section III., 
A.2)  
 IMPLEMENTATION  
 Technical Specifications Workorder (dated 03/14/23) 
and Whole Child Model  
 - 7 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken   
Supporting Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)  
DHCS Comments  
auditing will be annual after 2023.  
 
4. QIHEC Reporting:  
The Plan presented the updated Whole Child Model (WCM) Pediatric Risk Stratification on August 8, 2023,  to the Quality 
Improvement Health Equity Committee (QIHEC)  (Attachment 
7). 
   
  Attachment 7_Attachment 
7_QIHEC eMaterial_08- 08-2023  
       
  
  4. August 8, 2023  Pediatric Risk Stratification 
Technical Specifications  
revision log demonstrate the 
MCP has updated its internal systems.  Technical Specifications document instructs the assigning of 
members as high risk when no utilization data is identified.  
(WCM PRS Technical Specifications Update (Work Order) and Whole Child Model (WCM) Risk Stratification_Technical Specifications)  
 MONITORING  
 Q2 and Q3 PRSP Validation quarterly reports  and CM 
Tracking Dashboard demonstrate the MCP has a process in place to monitor  
pediatric risk stratification.  
(Q2_PRSP Validation_05- 11-
2023, Q3_PRSP Validation_07- 11-2023 and 
CM_Tracking Dashboard)  
 
 - 8 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken   
Supporting Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)  
DHCS Comments  
Agenda for 8/8/23 Quality 
Improvement  Health Equity 
Committee demonstrates the Whole Child  Model  Pediatric 
Risk Stratification Process was presented.  (QIHEC 
eMaterial_08- 08-2023)  
 The corrective action for 
finding 2.2.1 i s accepted.  
 
  
 
  Submitted by  Plan :  John A. Tanner  [signature on file]                                                                     Date:  September 15,2023  
  Title:  Chief Compliance Officer      
