California Department of Health Care Services  
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division   
P.O. Box 997413 | Sacramento , CA | 95899-7413
MS 4400  | Phone ( 916) 449-5000  | www. dhcs.ca.gov  State of California  
Gavin Newsom, Governor  
California Health and Human Services Agency  
 
Via E- mail June 
5, 2024 
Jane MacAdam, Director of Compliance      
Deborah Murr, Chief Compliance and Fraud Preve ntion Officer 
Kern Health Systems 
2900 Buck Owen Boulevard 
Bakersfield, CA 93308 
RE:
  Department of Health Care Services Medical Audit  
Dear Ms. MacAdam and Ms. Murr: 
The 
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), Audits and Investigations Division 
conducted an on-s ite Medical Audit of Kern Health Systems, a Managed Care Plan 
(MCP), 
from November 27, 2023 through December 8, 2023. The audit covered the 
period from November 1, 2022, through October 31, 2023 . 
The
 items w ere evaluated, and DHCS accepted the MCP’s submitted Corrective Action 
Plan (CAP). The CAP is hereby closed. The enclosed documents will serve as DHCS’ final 
r
esponse to the MCP’s CAP. Closure of this CAP does not halt any other processes in 
place between DHCS and the MCP regarding the deficiencies in the audit report  or 
elsewhere, nor does it preclude the DHCS from taking additional actions it deems 
necessary regarding these deficiencies. 
Please be advised that in accordance with Health & Safety Code Section 1380(h) and 
the Public Records Act, the final audit report and final CAP remediation document (final 
Attachment A) will be made available on the DHCS website and to the public upon 
request. 
If you have any questions, please reach out to CAP Compliance personnel. 
Sincerely, 
[Signature on file]
Lyubov Poonka, Chief 
Audit Monitoring Unit 
Process Compliance Section 
DHCS - Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division (MCQMD) 
Enclosures:  Attachment A (CA P Response Form) 
cc:      Stacy Nguyen, Chief       Via E- mail 
 V
ia E- mail 
  Via E-mail 
   Via E- mail 
 Via E- mail Managed Care Monitoring Branch 
DHCS - Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division (MCQMD) 
Grace McGeough, Chief 
Process Compliance Section 
Managed Care Monitoring Branch 
DHCS - Managed Care Quality & Monitoring Division (MCQMD) 
Maria Angel, Lead Analyst         
Audit Monitoring Unit 
Process Compliance Section 
DHCS - Managed Care Quality & Monitoring Division (MCQMD) 
Jessica Delgado, U nit Chief       
Managed Care Contract Ov ersight Branch 
DHCS – Managed Care Operations Division (MCOD) 
Lucas Paton, Contract M anager      
Managed Care Contract Oversight Branch 
DHCS – Managed Care Operations Division (MCOD) 
ATTACHMENT A  
Corrective Action Plan  Response Form  
 
Plan: Kern Health Systems              Review Period:  11/01/22 – 10/31/23  
Audit Type:  Medical Audit                             On-site Review:  11/27/23 – 12/08/23  
1 
 
 
 
MC
Ps are required to provide a C orrective Action Plan (C AP) and respond to all documented deficiencies  included in  the medical audit report within 30 calendar 
days unless an alternative timeframe is indicated in the CAP Request letter.  MCPs are required to submit the CAP in Word format , which will reduce the turnaround 
time for DHCS to complete its review. According to ADA requirements , the document should be at least 12 pt.  
 
The CAP submission must include a written statement identifying the deficiency and describing the plan of action taken to correct the deficiency, as well as the 
operational results of that action.  The MCP shall directly address each deficiency component by completing the following columns provided for MCP res ponse: 1. 
Finding  Number and Summary , 2. Action Taken, 3. Supporting  Documentation, and 4. Completion/Expected Completion Date. The MCP must  include a project 
timeline with milestones in a separate document for each finding. Supporting documentation should accompany each Action Taken. If supporting documentation 
is missing, the MCP submission will not be accepted.  For policies and other documentation tha t have been revised, please highlight the new relevant text and 
include additional details, such as the title of the document, page number, revision date, etc.,  in the column “Supporting Documentation” to assist DHCS in 
identifying any updates that were made by the plan. Implementing deficiencies requiring short -term corrective action  should be completed within 30 calendar 
days. For deficiencies that may be reasonably determined to require long-term corrective action for a period longer than 30 days to reme dy or operationalize 
completely , the MCP is to indicate that it has initiated remedial action and is on the way toward  achieving an acceptable level of compliance. In those instances, the 
MCP must include the date when full compliance will be completed in addition to the above steps. Policies and procedures submitted during the CAP process must 
still be sent to the MCP’s Contract Manager for review and approval, as applicable , according to  existing requirements.  
 Please note that DHCS expects the plan to ta ke swift action to implement improvement interventions as proposed in the CAP; therefore, DHCS 
encourages all remediation efforts to be in place no later than month 6 of the CAP unless DHCS grants prior approval for an extended implementation 
effort . 
 DHCS will communicate closely with the MCP throughout the CAP process and provide technical assistance to confirm that the MCP offers sufficient documentation to correct deficiencies. Depending on the number  and complexity of deficiencies identified, DHCS may require the MCP to provide weekly updates.  
  
2 6. Administrative and Organizational Capacity  
Finding Number 
and Summary  Action Taken  Supporting 
Documentation  Implementation 
Date *  
(*Short -Term, Long -Term) DHCS Comments  
6.2.1  
Fraud and Abuse Reporting  
 The Plan and did not report potential FWA to DHCS within ten working days.  KHS Response:  
 Kern Health Systems (KHS) has made significant improvement related to our Fraud, Waste, and Abuse initiatives over the past two years.  Please note the cases covered during the audit period reported to DHCS were reported with the following results:    
• 128 were reported timely 
(98.5%)  
• Two (2) were received late by Compliance and therefore reported late to DHCS (1.5%).  
 
Although at the time of the audit, we had already updated our training materials, provided job aides, and were already tracking cases that were received/reported late and reporting those out in our Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse Committee 1_FWA_MS Knowledge DB 
 2_MSMtng_20240228  
 2_CompFWA_20240228  
 3_CompCapsule_March  
 3_CompCapsuleMar2024  
 4_MSMtng_20240424  
 5_FWAWorkflow_202404  
  1. 02/28/2024  
 
 
2. 03/25/2024  
     3. 04/24/2024  
     4. 04/24/2024  
  5. 04/24/2024  The following documentation supports the MCP’s efforts to correct 
this finding:   
  
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES   
  
• Plan Policy “14.04 -P: Prevention, Detection, and Reporting of 
Fraud, Waste, or Abuse” (revised December 2022) already included language regarding the requirement to report 
potential FWA to the DHCS PIU within ten working days from the date of discovery or when it is notified of such activity; therefore, an update was not needed to the Plan’s existing policy. Plan policy states the Plan will refer all su spected FWA 
identified in a preliminary report to the DHCS Program Integrity Unit (PIU) within ten working days from the date of discovery or when the Plan is notified of such activity. Additionally, the Policy states that Plan employees who identify or re ceive 
reports of potential FWA should report it to the Compliance Department within two -working -days of internal identification 
or receiving the report. (DHCS Medical Audit Report (Issued 3/25/24), page 6)   
 
 
• The Plan updated “Suspected Fraud, Waste, and A buse - 
Internal Referral Process to Compliance,” revised 04/2024. The 
workflow demonstrates the Plan’s internal referral process to its 
3 Finding Number 
and Summary  Action Taken  Supporting 
Documentation  Implementation 
Date *  
(*Short -Term, Long -Term) DHCS Comments  
Meetings, we have taken the 
following additional corrective actions:  
 1.  Updated the FWA reference tool 
within the Member Services knowledge database  
 2. Compliance p resented at the 
Member Services meetings to review the importance of timely referrals and answer any questions the team may have.   
 
3. Focused our March Compliance Capsule on Fraud, Waste, and Abuse and the importance of timely referrals.  
 
4. Continued reminding the team of the importance in the 04/24/2028 Member Services Staff Meeting  
 
5. Updated our FWA referral compliance section. The workflow clearly outlines, if FWA is 
suspected, the actions that may be taken, including a corre ctive 
action plan as needed. In addition, Compliance Department meets weekly to monitor reporting timelines (5_FWAWorkflow_202404).    
  
• The Plan updated its “FWA Reference Tool” which is provided to Member Services team as an overview and instructions on reporting FWA, noting urgency of reporting as soon as Plan staff are made aware of suspected FWA. (1_FWA_MSKnowledgeDB)   
 
 
 TRAINING   
  
• PowerPoint training “Compliance Update,” dated 02/28/2024, demonstrates that the MCP conducted training to staff regarding the reporting of preliminary investigation of all suspected cases of fraud and abuse to DHCS within 10 working days of th e Plan receiving notification of the 
incident. (2_CompFWA_20240228)   
 
• The Plan distributed via email to all Plan staff “Compliance Capsule Mar 2024 FWA” document. The document addresses 
4  Finding Number 
and Summary  Action Taken  Supporting 
Documentation  Implementation 
Date *  
(*Short -Term, Long -Term) DHCS Comments  
workflow to address any referrals 
received late at the time of receipt and are tracking and trending for repeat offenses not only at the department level, but the employee level, to determine any additional corrective actions neede d. the importance of detecting and preventing FWA. 
(3_CompCapsuleMar2024)  
   
 MONITORING AND OVERSIGHT  
 
  
• The Plan provided FWA Committee Agenda held on May 6, 2024, which demonstrates evidence that the Plan reviewed and discussed updated Workflow and new process of addressing late submissions. Additionally, the Plan has a process in place to identify and report late submissions on a quarterly basis, which are discussed in the FWA Committee Meetings (6.2.1.6_FWA Agenda)   
 
 
• The Plan provided an updated tracking log (implemented 04/24/2024) identifying new columns that were ad ded to track 
FWA and timely reporting: "Days to Receive", "Submitted By" and "Internal Education Provided." The updated log addresses the gap that contributed to the audit finding. (6.2.1.6_FWA Log_20240424_current)   
   
The corrective action plan for findi ng 6.2.1 is accepted.  
5  Submitted by: Deborah Murr,  MHA,  BS-HCM,  RN 
Title:  Chief Compliance & Fraud Prevention Officer  
 Signed by:  [signature on file]  
Date:  04/24/2024  
