     
 
CONTRACT  AND ENROLLMENT  REVIEW – LOS ANG ELES 
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
DEPARTMENT  OF HEALTH  CARE  SERVICES 
 
 
REPORT  ON THE MEDICAL  AUDIT  OF 
 
Aetna  Better  Health  of California, Inc. 
 
2023 
 
 
Contract  Numbers:   
 
17-94600 Sacramento 
17-94602 San Diego 
Audit  Period:  April 1, 2022  
 Through  
 March  31, 2023  
Dates  of Audit:  April 17, 2023  
 Through  
 April 27, 2023  
Report  Issued:  September  27 2023  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
  
I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................. 1 
 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................... 2 
 
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  ........................................................ 4 
 
 IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
   Category 4 – Member’s Rights …………………………………………6 
  Category 5 – Quality Management ………………………….………..10  
 
   
 
 
1 of 9  I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Aetna Better Health of California, Inc. (Plan) is a subsidiary of Aetna, Inc., which is 
headquartered in Hartford,  Connecticut  and is one of the largest  health care companies 
in the United States. Together with its national partners, the Plan supports 2.7 million Medicaid members in 16 states.  
 
In November  2017, the Plan obtained its Knox -Keene license from the California 
Department  of Managed Health Care.  The Plan provides  members  full medical  benefits, 
including vision coverage and obstetrical care.  
 
The Department  of Health Care Services  (DHCS)  contracted with the Plan as a new 
Geographic Managed Care health plan in Sacramento and San Diego counties as of 
January 1, 2018.  
 
The Plan will be closing its Medi -Cal line s of business in both Sacramento and San 
Diego counties on December 31, 2023.  
 As of March 31, 2023,  the Plan served 27,943 members  in Sacramento and 36,827 
members in San Diego through the Medi -Cal line of business.  
2 of 9  II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
This report presents the audit findings  of the DHCS medical audit for the period of April 
1, 2022 through March 31, 2023.  The audit was conducted from April 17, 2023 through 
April 27, 2023.  The audit consisted of document  review,  verification studies,  and 
interviews with Plan representatives.  
 
An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on August 25, 2023.  The Plan was allowed 
15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information to address the preliminary audit findings. On September 11, 2023,  the Plan 
submitted a response. The results of our evaluation of the Plan’s response are reflected in this report.  
 
The audit evaluated six categories  of performance:  Utilization  Management,  Case 
Management and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Member’s 
Rights, Quality Management, and Administrative and Organizational Capacity.  
 
The prior DHCS  was issued on December 21, 2022, for the audit period of April  1, 
2021 through March 31, 2022. This audit examined the Plan’s compliance with its 
DHCS Contract and assessed implementation of its prior year’s Corrective Action Plan.  
 
The summary  of the findings  by category  follows:  
 
Category 1 – Utilization Management  
 
There were no findings  noted for this category during the audit period.  
 
Category 2 – Case Management  and Coordination of Care  
 
There were no findings noted for this category during the audit period.  
 
Category 3 – Access and Availability  of Care  
 
There were no findings noted for this category during the audit period.  
 
Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 
The Plan and subcontractors shall not submit claims or demand, or otherwise collect 
reimbursement for any services provided under this Contract from a Medi -Cal member.  
The Plan providers billed fully Medi -Cal eligible members for services which were 
covered under the contract.  
     
 
3 of 9  The Plan is required to classify a complaint as a grievance. If the Plan is unable to distinguish between a grievance and an inquiry, it must be considered a grievance. Any 
inquiry is a request for information that does not include an expression of dissatisfaction. The Plan did not properly classify and process members’ expression of dissatisfaction as 
a grievance.  
 
The Plan i s required to implement and maintain a process to categorize a complaint as a 
grievance and not an inquiry when a member express es to decline to file a grievance. 
The Plan did not implem ent and maintain a process to categorize a complaint as a 
grievance and not an inquiry when a member express ed to decline to file a grievance.
 
 
Category 5 – Quality Management  
 
The Plan is required to monitor and impose correct ive action to address noncompliance 
with subcontractors. The Plan did not impose corrective action and financial sanctions on 
subcontractors upon discovery of noncompliance with subcontract or other Medi -Cal 
requirements.  
 Category 6 – Administrative  and Organizational Capacity  
 There were no findings noted for this category during the audit period.   
 
  
4 of 9   
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES 
 
 
SCOPE 
 
This audit was conducted by DHCS, Contract and Enrollment Review Division to 
ascertain that the medical services provided to Plan members  comply  with federal  and 
state laws,  Medi -Cal regulations  and guidelines,  and the State Contracts.  
 
PROCEDURE  
 
The audit  was conducted from April 17, 2023 through A pril 27, 2023. The audit included 
a review of the Plan’s policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement  
the policies,  and verification studies  of the implementation and effectiveness of those 
policies. Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted with Plan administrators and staff.  
 
The following verification studies  were conducted:  
 
Category 1 – Utilization Management  
 
Prior Authorization Requests:  21 m edical and 30 delegated prior authorization requests  
were reviewed for timeliness, consistent application of criteria, and appropriate review.  
 
Appeal  Procedures:  15 appeals  of medical  prior authorizations were reviewed for 
appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 
Category 2 – Case Management  and Coordination of Care  
 
Behavioral Health Treatment : Ten medical  records  were reviewed to confirm  
coordination of care and fulfillment of behavioral health requirements.  
 
Category 3 – Access and Availability  of Care  
 
Claims:  15 emergency  services  and ten family planning claims were reviewed for 
appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 
Non-Emergency Medical Transportation and Non-Medical Transportation: 22 records (12 Non-Emergency Medical Transportation and ten Non-Medical Transportation) 
were reviewed to confirm compliance with transportation requirements for timeliness and appropriate adjudication.
 
Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 
Grievances : 72 standard griev ances  including 27 quality of care and 45 quality of 
service , ten exempt grievances, and 30 call inquiries were reviewed for timely 
resolution,  response to the complainant,  submissi on to the appropriate level for review, 
and translation in member’s preferred language.  
 
Category 5 – Quality  Management  
 
Potential  Quality  Issue: Four  files were reviewed for evaluation and effective action 
taken to address needed improvement s. 
 
A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report . 
 
5 of 9  
6 of 10  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
PLAN:  Aetna Better  Health of California,  Inc. 
AUDIT  PERIOD: April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DATES  OF AUDIT:  April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023 
  
 
CATEGORY 4 – MEMBER’S RIGHTS  
 
 
4.1  
GRIEVANCE SYSTEM  
 
4.1.1 Billing Medi-Cal Members  
The Plan and subcontractors  shall not submit claim s or demand, or otherwise collect 
reimbursement for any services provided under this Contract from a Medi -Cal member. 
(Contract s Exhibit A, Attachment 8(6)(A))  
 
A provider of service under the Medi -Cal program shall not submit claims to or demand or 
otherwise c ollect reimbursement from a Medi -Cal member, or from other persons on behalf 
of the member, for any service included in the Medi -Cal program's scope of benefits in 
addition to a claim submitted to the Medi -Cal program for that service. (California Code 
Regulations  (CCR) , Title 22, section 51002(a))  
 
A provider of health care services who obtains a label or copy from the Medi -Cal card or 
other proof of eligibility pursuant to this chapter shall not seek reimbursement nor  attempt 
to obtain payment for the cos t of those covered health care services from the eligible 
applicant or recipient, or a person other than the department or a third-party payor who provides a contractual or legal entitlement to health care services. (California Welfare & 
Institutions Code, section 14019.4(a))  
 
Finding: The Plan providers billed fully Medi -Cal eligible members for services which were 
covered under the contract.  
 A review of the verification files revealed eight member grievances were associated with balance-billing error issues. Although the Plan confirmed members were released from 
financial responsibility and advised the balance bills were sent in error , the Plan did not 
have policy and procedures in place to ensure billing issues would not reoccur with the 
same subcontractors.  In addition, ther e were no enforceable actions when the same  
subcontractors continued to submit claims to Medi -Cal members for covered services.  
 
During the interview, the Plan acknowledged their process did not prevent the improper  
billing of its members due to administrative errors.  
 When the Plan does not address improper billing of its members, this may discourage 
members from seeking medically necessary care.  
 Recommendation: Develop and implement policy and procedures to ensure that the Plan 
providers are prohibited from billing fully eligible Medi -Cal members for covered services.  
 
7 of 10  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT  FINDINGS  
PLAN:  Aetna Better  Health of California,  Inc. 
AUDIT  PERIOD: April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DATES  OF AUDIT:  April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023 
  4.1.2 Grievance Classification and Processing  
 The Plan is required to have a member grievanc e system in  accordance with CCR, Title 
28, sections  1300.68, and 1300.68.01;  and Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) , Title 42, 
sections , 438.402-424. (Contract s, Exhibit A, Attachment 14 (1))  
 The Plan is required to have procedures  to ensure a member  may file a grievance at any 
time to express dissatisfaction about any matter other than an action resulting in a N otice 
of Action. (Contract s, Exhibit A, Attachment 14 (2)(B) (1)) 
 A grievance is defined as a written or verbal expression of dissatisfaction regarding the Plan and/or provider, including quality of care concerns, and shall include a complaint or dispute. Where the Plan is unable to distinguish between a grievance and an inquiry, it shall be considered a grievance. (CCR, Title 28, section 1300.68(a)(1))  
 The Plan is required to have a grievance and appeal system in place for members. Plans 
must allow members to submit a grievance or appeal orally or in writing. ( CFR, Title 42, 
section 438.402)  
 A complaint is the same as a grievance. If the Managed Care Plan ( MCP ) is unable to 
distinguish between a grievance and an inquiry, it must be considered a grievance. Any 
inquiry is a request for information that does not include an expression of dissatisf action. 
Inquiries may include, but are not limited to, questions pertaining to eligibility, benefits, or other MCP process.  (All Plan Letter  (APL) 21-011 Grievance and Appeal Requirements, 
Notice and “Your Rights” Templates)  
 Finding:  The Plan did not properly classify and process members’ expressions of 
dissatisfaction as a grievance.  
 A review of the transcribed inquiry log revealed members’ expressions of dissatisfaction were not classified as grievances in three instances during the audit period.  The Plan’s 
Member Service Staff (MSS) did not follow its policy and procedures in classifying inquiries 
as grievances when the inquiries met the grievance definition.  
 
• One instance, MSS assisted an upset member who had trouble with requesting a 
provider that speaks Mandarin. The inquiry was not classified as an exempt grievance.  
 
• One instance, MSS assisted an upset member with a transportation issue. The inquiry was not classified as an exempt grievance.  
 
• One instance, a member expressed an issue with making an appointment. The inquiry was not classified as a standard grievance.  
 
8 of 10  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT  FINDINGS  
PLAN:  Aetna Better  Health of California,  Inc. 
AUDIT  PERIOD: April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DATES  OF AUDIT:  April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023 
  During the interview, the Plan confirmed the existing monitoring system did not effectiv ely 
capture the misclassification of call inquiries. The Plan acknowledged its MSS needed retraining on classifying members’ expressions of dissatisfaction.  
 When the Plan does not properly classify and process members’ expressions of dissatisfaction as gr ievances, it can result in failure to identify substandard and poor quality 
of medical care for members.   Recommendation:  Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure member s’ 
expressions of dissatisfaction are c lassified as grievances.  
 4.1.3 Filing Grievance 
 The Plan shall have a member grievance system in place in accordance with CCR, Title 
28, sections 1300.68, and 1300.68.01; and CFR, Title  42, sections  438.402-424.  
(Contract s, Exhibit A, Attachment 14 (1))  
 The Plan is required to have a grievance and appeal system in place for members. Plans 
must allow members to submit a grievance or appeal orally or in writing.  
(CFR, Title 42, section 438.402)  
 The Plan must establish, implement, maintain,  and oversee a grievance system to ensure 
the receipt, review, and resolution of grievances. The grievance system must operate in accordance with all applicable federal and state law s. The grievance system must include 
reporting procedures in order to impr ove the Plan’s  policies and procedures. ( APL 21-011 
Grievance and Appeal Requirements, Notice and “Your Rights” Templates)  
  
The Plan must not discourage the filing of grievances. A member need not use the word “grievance” for a complaint to be captured as an expression of dissatisfaction and processed as a grievance by the Plan. If a member expressly declines to file a grievanc e, 
the compliant must still be categorized as a grievance and not an inquiry.  
(APL 21-011 Grievance and Appeal Requirements, Notice and “Your Rights” Templates)  
 Finding:  The Plan did not implem ent and maintain a process to categorize a complaint as 
a grievance and not an inquiry when a member expressly declined to file a grievance.  
 A review of Plan’s Desktop Procedures 4500.42D, Accepting Member Grievance and 
Appeals Call , revealed that the definition of declined grievance was not clearly delineated  
in the policy. There was no instruction provided to MSS when a member expressly 
declined to file a grievance.  
    
9 of 10  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT  FINDINGS  
PLAN:  Aetna Better  Health of California,  Inc. 
AUDIT  PERIOD: April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DATES  OF AUDIT:  April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023 
  During the interview, the Plan confirmed that if a member expressly declines to file a grievance during an inquiry call, the MSS would deem the complaint no longer meeting the grievance criteria and would categorize the complaint as an inquiry. Subsequentl y, in a 
follow -up interview, the Plan acknowledged and confirmed its Desktop Procedures need to 
be revised to align with the APL requirements.  
 If the Plan does not accurately categorize the complaint as a grievance and not an inquiry when a member express ly declines to file a grievance, this may  prevent the Plan from 
addressing care and service quality problem s.   
 Recommendation:  Revise and implement policies and procedures to accurately 
categorize members’ complaints.  
   
10 of 10  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
PLAN:  Aetna Better  Health of California,  Inc. 
AUDIT  PERIOD: April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DATES  OF AUDIT:  April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023 
  
CATEGORY 5 – QUALITY MA NAGEMENT  
 
5.1 QUALITY IMPROVEMENT SYSTEM  
 
5.1.1 Quality Improvement Oversight  
 The Plan shall monitor, evaluate, and take effective action to address any needed improvements in the quality of care delivered by all providers rendering services on its behalf, in any setting regardless of the number of contracting and subcontracting layers between the Plan and the providers. ( Contract s, Exhibit A, Attachment 4, section (1))  
 
The Plan must also have in place policies and procedures for imposing corrective action 
and financial sanctions on subcontractors upon discovery of noncompliance with the 
subcontract or other Medi -Cal requirements. (APL 17-004, Subcontractual Relationships 
and Delegation) 
 The Plan must establish and implement an ongoing comprehensive quality assessment 
and performance improvement program for the services furnished to members.   
(CFR, Title 42, section 438. 330(a) ) 
 Plan Policy 8000.70, Quality Management Oversight (revis ed 02/2022) . explained the 
quality improvement cycle steps to include and identify key areas to focus improvement 
opportunities and determine root causes. The process  outlined the plan to develop 
implementation of Corrective Action Plan, carry out plan, reevaluate to assess 
effectiveness, and revise implementation plan or increase intensity of Corrective Action 
Plan accordingly.  
 Finding:  The Plan did not impose corrective action and financial sanctions on 
subcontractors upon discovery of noncompliance with Medi -Cal requirements . 
 A verification study revealed eight member grievances were associated with balance- billing error issues. Although, the Plan’ s Grievance and Appeal Department identified 
balance-billing errors as  a top grievance issue. D uring the interview,  the Plan confirmed 
there was no corrective action issued with subcontractors to address the balance-billing 
errors during the audit period. The subcontractors continued to send bills to members.   
 Without follow -up of non-compliant subcontractors, the Plan may lack the ability to take 
effective action to address any necessary improvements in the s ervice delivered to 
members.  
 Recommendation: Develop and implement policies and procedures to impose corrective 
action upon discovery of noncompliance.  
     
 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW – LOS ANGELES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
DEPARTMENT  OF HEALTH  CARE  SERVICES 
 
 
REPORT  ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
 
Aetna  Better  Health  of California, Inc. 
 
2023 
 
 
Contract  Numbers:   
 
17-94601 Sacramento 
17-94603 San Diego  
State  Supported Services  
Audit  Period:  
 
 
Dates  of Audit:  
 
 
Report  Issued:  April 1, 2022 
Through 
March 31, 2023 
 April 17, 2023 
Through  
April 27, 2023 
 
September  27, 2023  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
   
 
I. INTRODUCTION  ................................................................................. 1  
Il. COMPLIANCE  AUDIT  FINDINGS  ...................................................... 2 
 
1 of 2  I. INTRODUCTION 
 
 
This report presents the results of the audit of Aetna Better Health of California, Inc. 
(Plan) compliance and implementation of the State  Supported Services  contracts with the 
State of California.  Contracts cover abortion services with the Plan.  
 
The review  was conducted from April 17, 2023 through A pril 27, 2023. The audit covered 
the audit period from April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023.  It consisted of document 
review s and interviews with the Plan’s staff.  
 
An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on August 25,  2023.  There were no deficiencies 
found for the audit  period on the Plan’s Sate Supported Services.
2 of 2  COMPLIANCE AUDIT  FINDINGS  
PLAN: Aetna Better  Health of California,  Inc. 
AUDIT  PERIOD: April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DATES  OF AUDIT:  April 17,  2023 through April 27, 2023 
 
  
STATE  SUPPORTED  SERVICES 
 
The Plan is required to provide, or arrange to provide, to eligible members the 
following State Supported Services:   Current Procedural  Terminology (CPT) Codes : 
59840 through 59857. Health Care Financing Administration Commo n Procedure Coding 
System Codes : X1516, X1518, X7724,  X7726, and Z0336.  
(Contract s, Exhibit A, Section 1)  
 
Abortion services are covered by the Medi -Cal progr am. Medi cal justification and prior 
authorization for outpatient  abortion services  is not required.  (All Plan Letter  15-020, 
Abortion Services)  
 
The Plan’s policy 8300.20, Family Planning and Reproductive Health (revised 
December 2020) , stated that abortion services are covered by the Medi -Cal program as 
a physician service. Abortion is a covered benefit regardless of the gestational age of the fetus and are, by nature, sensitive services. All Managed Care Plans (MCPs) must 
implement and maintain proc edures that ensure confidentiality and access to these 
sensitive services. MCPs, providers, independent practice associations, preferred provider groups and all delegated entities that provide physician services must not require medical justification and prior authorization for outpatient abortion services. 
MCPs are responsible to provide, or arrange to provide, abortion services.  
 
The Plan maintained a list of CPT Codes for procedures and related services that  are 
exempt from prior authorization that the Plan’s Claims Department used in auto payment of claims processing. The Plan’s claims system configuration ensured no prior author ization was needed. The billing codes for sensitive services that are exempt from 
prior authorization included the CPT Codes 59840 through 59857.   Based on the review, no deficiencies were noted for the audit period.  
 Recommendation:  None.  
