1 
DHCS AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRA
CT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION 
REPORT O N TH E FOCUSED AU DIT OF 
COMMUNITY H EALTH GROUP P ARTNERSHIP 
PLAN 20 23 
Contract N umber: 0 9-86155 
Audit Period: June 1, 2022 – May 31, 2023 
Dates of
 Audit: July 10, 2023 – July 21, 2023 
Report Issued: August 30, 2024
2 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................. 3  
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................... 5 
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES ...........................................................................6  
IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS Performance Area: Transportation ...............................................................7   
Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
  
3 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Background  
In accordance with California Welfare and Institutions Code section 14456,  the 
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) may conduct additional reviews outside the annual medical audit when DHCS determines there is good cause.  
DHCS directed Contract and Enrollment Review Division to conduct focused audits of all contracting Medi -Cal Managed Care Plans ( Plans) to evaluate  current performance in 
Behavioral Health and Transportation services.  
These focused audits differ from DHCS’  regular annual medical audits in scope and 
depth. The annual medical audits  evaluate the Plan ’s organizational structures, policies 
and procedures, and systems for compliance with contractual requirements. The focused audits examine d the operational issues that may hinder appropriate and timely member 
access to medically necessary care. The f ocused audit engagement formally commence d 
in January 2023 through December 2023. 
For the  Behavioral Health  section, the focused audit evaluated the Plan’s monitoring 
activities of specific ar eas such as Specialty Mental Health Services (SMHS), Non -
Specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS), and Substance Use Disorder Services (SUDS). 
The focused audit also review ed potential issues that may contribute to the lack of 
member access  and oversight for SMHS, NSMHS, and SUDS.  
The focused audit conducted  a more in -depth look at current Plan  operations/practices 
for executing the delivery of transportation services. The audit examined  potential 
causes for the systemic issues surrounding the Non-Emergency Medical Transportation  
(NEMT)  and Non-Medical Transportation  (NMT)  benefit, specifically when  
transportation is delegated to a transportation broker.  
Incorporated in 1982, Community Health Group Partnership Plan (Plan) first contracted with DHCS in 1986, to provide services to Medi -Cal members. In 2005, the Plan obtained 
a Knox -Keene license from the California Department of Managed Health Care to servi ce 
Medi -Cal members.  
The Plan currently contracts with DHCS to provide services to Medi -Cal beneficiaries 
under the Geographic Managed Care program in San Diego County. During the audit period, the Plan provided health care services through contracts with community clinics, medical groups, and individual physicians. The Plan also provided pharmacy services 
through a contract with Pharmacy Benefits Manager, MedImpact Healthcare Systems, Inc. 
4 
 
 As of May 2023, the Plan served 353,598 members with Medi -Cal coverage.  
  
5 
 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 This report presents the audit findings of DHCS’ focused audit for the period of June 1, 2022, through May 31, 2023. The audit was conducted from July 10, 2023, through July 21, 2023. The audit consisted of document review, surveys, verification studies, and interviews and file reviews with Plan representatives.  
An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on June 28, 2024. The Plan was allowed 15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing the draft audit report findings. The Plan submitted a response after the E xit 
Conference. The results of the evaluation of the Plan’s response are reflected in this report.  
The focused audit evaluated the areas of performance for Behavioral Health and Transportation services.  
The summary of findings by performance area follows:  
Performance Area: Behavioral Health 
Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care : 
• Specialty Mental Health Services  
• Non-Specialty Mental Health Services  
• Substance Use Disorder Services  Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
There were no findings noted for this category during the audit period.  
Performance Area: Transportation  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
• Non-Emergency Medical Transportation  
• Non-Medical Transportation  
The Plan can provide telephone authorization for NEMT requests when a member requires a Plan -covered medically necessary service of an urgent nature, and a Physician 
Certification Statement (PCS) form could not have reasonably been submitted beforehand. Th e member’s provider must submit a PCS form post -service for the 
telephone authorization to be valid. The Plan did not allow for telephone authorization for NEMT requests when a member required a covered medically necessary service of an urgent nature, and a PCS form could not have reasonably been submitted beforehand.  
6 
 
III. SCOPE/ AUDIT PROCEDURES  
 
SCOPE  
This focused audit was conducted by the DHCS, Contract and Enrollment Review Division to ascertain that the medical services provided to Plan members complied with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and the State Contract.  
PROCEDURE  
On November 3, 2022, DHCS informed Plan s that it will be conducting focused audits to 
assess performance in certain identified high -risk areas. The focused audit was 
concurrently scheduled with the annual medical audit of Plan s. The audit scope 
encompasse d the following sections:  
• Behavioral Health  – SMHS, NSMHS, and SUDS 
• Transportation – NEMT and NMT services  
The audit was conducted from July  10, 2023, through July  21, 2023.  The audit included a 
review of the Plan’s policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement the policies, and verification st udies of the implementation and effectiveness of the 
policies. Documents were reviewe d and interviews were conducted with Plan 
administrators and staff. 
The following verification studies were conducted:  
Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care  
SMHS: Ten cases were reviewed to evaluate whether there was member care coordination between the Plan and the county MHP, as well as compliance with All Plan Letters (APL) requirements.  NSMHS: Ten samples were reviewed to evaluate compliance with APL requirements.  SUDS: Five samples were reviewed to evaluate compliance with APL requirements.  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
NEMT: Ten samples were reviewed to evaluate compliance with APL requirements.  NMT: Ten samples were reviewed to evaluate compliance with APL requirements.  A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report .
7 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
Performance Area: Transportation – NEMT and NMT  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
 
3.1 Telephone Authorization  
The Plan can provide telephone authorization for NEMT requests when a member requires a covered medically necessary service of an urgent nature and for which a PCS form could not have reasonably been submitted beforehand. The member’s provider must submit a PCS form post -service for the telephone authorization to be valid. ( APL 
22-008 Non -Emergency Medical and Non-Medical Transportation Services and Related 
Travel Expenses ) 
Plan policy, 6059 Non -Emergency Medical Transportation & Non-Medical Transportation 
(revised 02/13/2023), states that the Plan provides telephone authorization for NEMT requests when a member requires a Plan -covered medically necessary service of an 
urgent nature, and a PCS form could not have reasonably been submitted beforehand. The member’s provider must submit a PCS form post -service for the telephone 
authorization to be valid.  
Finding:  The Plan failed to allow for telephone authorization of NEMT requests when a 
member required a covered medically necessary service of an urgent nature, and a PCS form could not have reasonably been submitted beforehand.  Although Plan policy 6059, states that the Plan provides telephone authorization for NEMT requests when a member requires a Plan -covered medically necessary service of 
an urgent nature, the Plan did not follow this policy and procedure.  
The Plan’s statement and process for authorizing NEMT requests that are urgent in nature, do not adhere to the Plan’s policies and procedures. During the interview, the Plan stated that members are advised to seek ambulance services, or call 9-1 -1, for 
urgent or emergency transportation services, as no authorization would be necessary. 
Additionally, if the Plan is unable to secure a completed PCS form for an urgent request for NEMT, the Plan would not provide the transportation. The Plan required a PCS form  
to provide the transportation service.  
In a written statement, the Plan acknowledged that the interview statement regarding processing urgent transportation request in situations where a PCS form could not be 
8 
 
secured beforehand was incorrect and clarified that the policy 6059 regarding telephone authorization for urgent NEMT requests is accurate. Furthermore, the Plan stated that they will update the process to allow urgent NEMT requests to be authorized withou t 
submission of the PCS form first.  
Without the ability to authorize urgent NEMT, members may experience delays in accessing care resulting in adverse impact on members’ health.  Recommendation: Implement policies and procedures to allow for telephone 
authorization of NEMT requests when a member requires a covered medically necessary service of an urgent nature and for which a PCS form could not have reasonably been submitted beforehand.  
