1 
DHCS AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION 
REPORT O N TH E FOCUSED AU DIT OF ORANGE 
COUNTY ORGANI ZED H EALTH SYSTEM 
DBA CA LOPTIMA 2 023 
Contract N umber: 0 8-85214 
Audit Period: February 1, 20 22 Through J anuary 31, 202 3 
Dates of Audit: February 27, 2023 Through March 10, 2023 
Report Issued: August 30, 2024
2 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................. 3 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................... 5 
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES ........................................................................... 7 
IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS
Performance Area: Behavioral Health  ......................................................... 8 
Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care  
3 
I. INTRODUCTION
Background  
In ac cordance w ith Ca lifornia Welfare an d Institutions Code  section 14456, th e 
Department of He alth Car e Services (DHCS) m ay conduct additional r eview s outside o f 
the an nual m edical au dit when D HCS de termines there i s good cause.  
DHCS di rected the Co ntract an d Enrollmen t Review D ivision to c onduct focused audits 
of all contracting M edi-C al Managed Care Pl ans (Plans) to e valuate th e current Plans’ 
performance i n the areas of B ehavioral Health an d Transportation s ervices. 
These focused audi ts differ f rom D HCS’ regular an nual m edical au dits in sc ope an d 
depth. Th e annual m edical au dits evaluate t he Pl an’s organizational str uctures, p olicies 
and pro cedures, a nd systems fo r compliance with c ontractual req uirements. T he focused 
audits examined the operational i ssues that m ay hinder ap propriate an d timely member 
access to medically necessary care. Th e focused audi t engagement formall y commenced 
in January 2023 through D ecember 20 23.           
For th e Behavioral Health se ction, the f ocused audit evaluated the Plan’s monitoring 
activities o f specific areas s uch a s Specialty M ental Health S ervices (S MHS), Non -
Specialty Mental Health S ervices (NSMHS), an d Substance U se Disorder S ervices (SUDS). 
The focused audit also r eviewe d potential i ssues that may contribute to the lack o f 
member access a nd ov ersight f or SMHS, N SMHS, a nd SU DS. 
The f ocused audit conducted a more i n-depth l ook at current Plan operations/practices 
for executing the d elivery o f transportation se rvices. Th e audit examined potential 
causes for t he syst emic i ssues surrounding the N on-Emergency Medical Tr ansportation 
(NEMT) a nd N on-M edical Tr ansportation ( NMT) se rvices, sp ecifically when 
transportation i s delegate d to a transportation b roker. 
CalOptim a Health Pl an (Plan) w as founded in 1 993 via a partnership o f the local 
government, th e medical c ommunity (both h ospitals and physicians), an d health 
advocates. In 1995, Th e Plan began o peration as a County Organized Healthcare S ystem 
to provide me dical care f or M edi-C al beneficiaries in Or ange Co unty. 
In addition, t he Plan i s currently g overned by a Bo ard o f Directors o f ten m embers 
appointed by t he O range County Bo ard o f Supervisors. The Board of Directors i s 
comprise d of Pl an m embers, p roviders, b usiness leaders, an d local go vernment 
representatives. 
4 
 
The Plan currently has several programs to provide medical care to its members residing in Orange County. As of December 31, 2022, the composition of the Plan membership was as follows:  
• Medi -Cal: 927,086 Medi -Cal recipients which includes low -income individuals, 
families with children, seniors, and people with disabilities. • OneCare (Health Maintenance Organization Special Needs Plan): 17,381 Medi -
Cal and Medicare members.  
• Program of All -Inclusive Care for the Elderly: 437 Medicare/Medicaid and 
Medi -Cal recipients aged 55 and older who live in the service area and are 
eligible for nursing facility services.  
5 
 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 This report presents the audit findings of the DHCS’ focused audit for the period of 
February 1, 2022, through January 31, 2023. The audit was conducted from February 27, 2023, through March 10, 2023. The audit consisted of document review, surveys, verification studies, interviews and file reviews with the Plan representatives.  
The Plan declined an Exit Conference to be held on June 24, 2024. The Plan was allowed 15 calendar days from the date of the originally scheduled Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing the draft audit report findings. The Plan submi tted 
a response after the originally scheduled Exit Conference. The results of DHCS’ evaluation of the Plan’s response are reflected in this report.  
The focused audit evaluated the areas of performance for Behavioral Health and Transportation services.  
The summary of findings by performance area follows:  
Performance Area: Behavioral Health 
Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care : 
• Specialty Mental Health Services  
• Non-Specialty Mental Health Services  
• Substance Use Disorder Services  Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
The Plan is required to arrange for member referrals to the county department responsible for substance use treatment, or other community resources when services are not available through counties, for members identified as requiring alcohol or Substance U se Disorder (SUD) treatment services. The Plan is required to make good 
faith efforts to confirm whether members receive referred treatments and document when, and where these treatments were received, and any next steps following treatment. If a member do es not receive referred treatments, the Plan must follow up 
with the member to understand barriers and make adjustments to the referrals if warranted. The Plan did not make good faith efforts to confirm whether members received referred treatments for SUDS  and did not follow -up with members who did not 
receive referred treatments to understand barriers and make subsequent adjustments to referrals.  
 
6 
 
Performance Area: Transportation  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
• Non-Emergency Medical Transportation  
• Non-Medical Transportation  
There were no findings noted for this category during the audit period.  
  
7 
 
III. SCOPE/ AUDIT PROCEDURES  
 
SCOPE  
This focused audit was conducted by the DHCS, Contract and Enrollment Review Division to ascertain the medical services provided to Plan members comply with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and the State Contract.  
PROCEDURE  
On November 3, 2022, DHCS informed Plans that it would be conducting focused audits to assess performance in certain identified high -risk areas. The focused audit was 
concurrently scheduled with the annual medical audit. The audit scope encompassed the following sections:  
• Behavioral Health - SMHS, NSMHS, and SUDS 
• Transportation – NEMT and NMT services  
The audit was conducted from February 27, 2023, through March 10, 2023. The audit included a review of the Plan’s policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement the policies, and verification studies of the implementation and effectivene ss 
of the policies. Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted with Plan administrators and staff.  
The following verification studies were conducted:  
Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care  
SMHS: Five samples were reviewed to confirm care coordination with the county Mental Health Plan (MHP) and compliance with All Plan Letter (APL) requirements.  
NSMHS: Five samples were reviewed to confirm compliance with APL requirements.  SUDS: Five samples were reviewed to confirm compliance with APL requirements.  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
NEMT: Twelve samples were reviewed to confirm compliance with APL requirements.  NMT: Ten samples were reviewed to confirm compliance with APL requirements.  A description of the findings is contained in the following report.  
 
 
8 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
Performance Area: Behavioral Health – SMHS, NSMHS, and 
SUDS 
Category 2 – Case  Management  and Coordination of Care  
 
2.1 Follow up for Referred SUD Treatment 
The Plan is required to arrange for member referrals to the county department responsible for substance use treatment, or other community resources when services are not available through counties, for members identified as requiring alcohol or SUD treatme nt services. The Plan is required to make good faith efforts to confirm whether 
members receive referred treatments and document when, and where these treatments were received, and any next steps following treatment. (APL 21 -014 Alcohol and Drug 
Screening,  Assessment, Brief Intervention, Referral and Treatment)  
Plan policy, GG -1100 Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder Treatment Services (revised 
January 1, 2022), states that the Plan shall make good faith efforts to confirm whether members receive referred treatments, and document when, where, and any next steps following treatment.  
Finding:  The Plan did not make good faith efforts to confirm whether members 
received referred treatments for SUDS.  
While the Plan’s policy GG -1100 states the Plan shall make good faith efforts to confirm 
whether the members received treatments, the Plan did not submit evidence to show it adheres to its own policy.  A verification study of five SUDS samples revealed the Plan's records did not contain any documentation that the Plan made good faith efforts to confirm whether members received referred treatments. The records also did not contain any indication that the Plan documented when, where, and any next steps following treatment.  During the interview and in a written statement, the Plan stated it has a process to obtain ad- hoc information from the MHP to confirm members received referred services 
through verbal or electronically. However, the Plan’s policies and procedures does not  
contain this ad -hoc process. Also, the verification study records found no evidence to 
show the Plan requested this information to determine whether the member received the referred SUDS and documented the next steps following treatment.  
9 
 
Without good faith efforts from the Plan to ensure referred treatment was received by the member, the member may not be receiving medically necessary services.  
Recommendation: Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure that the 
Plan makes good faith efforts to confirm whether members receive referred treatments and document when, where, and any next steps following treatment.  
 
2.2 SUDS –  Follow -up to Understand Barriers and Adjust Referrals 
The Plan must make good faith efforts to confirm whether members receive referred treatments and document when, where, and any next steps following treatment. If a member does not receive referred treatments, the Plan must follow up with the member to unde rstand barriers and make adjustments to the referrals, if warranted. Plans should 
also attempt to connect with the provider to whom the member was referred to facilitate a warm hand off to necessary treatment. (APL 21-014 Alcohol and Drug Screening, Assessment, Brief Interventions and Referral to Treatment)  
Plan policy, GG -1100 Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder Treatment Services (revised 
January 1, 2022), states if a member does not receive referred treatments, the Plan shall follow -up with the member to understand barriers and adjust the referrals, if warr anted. 
The Plan shall also attempt to connect with the provider to whom the member was referred to facilitate a warm hand off to necessary treatment.  Finding:  The Plan did not have a process in place to follow -up with members to 
understand barriers and make subsequent adjustments to referrals.  
A verification study of five SUDS samples found that the Plan's records did not contain any documentation that the Plan made good faith efforts to confirm whether members received referred treatments, nor any documentation of efforts to follow up with memb
ers to understand barriers and make adjustments to the referrals, if warranted.                                 
Even though the Plan’s policy GG- 1100 states the follow -up will be conducted to 
understand barriers, the Plan did not submit evidence to show the Plan adheres to the APL requirement and its own policy to confirm members received the referred treatment.  
During the interview and in a written statement, the Plan stated it has a process to obtain ad- hoc information from the MHP to confirm members received referred services 
through verbal or electronically. However, the Plan’s policies and procedures do not contain this ad -hoc process. The Plan did not submit evidence to show it has a 
10 
 
documented process to understand the barriers and make any referral adjustments for the medically necessary services.  
If there is no follow up with the member to understand barriers and make adjustments as warranted, the member may not receive medically necessary care.  
Recommendation: Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure that if a 
member does not receive referred treatment, the Plan must follow up with the member to understand barriers and make adjustments to the referrals, if warranted as well as follow up with member s who do not receive referred treatments.  
 
