   
     
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
CONTRACT AND ENROL LMENT REVIEW DIVISION  
LOS ANGELES SECTION  
 
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
AIDS HEALTHCARE  FOUNDATION DBA  
 POSITIVE HEALTHCARE  CALIFORNIA  
 
2023 
 
 
Contract Number:  
  
11-88286  
 
Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit :    
Report Issued:  
 October 1, 2022  
    through  
September 30, 2023  
 
November 27, 2023  
    through  
December 8, 2023  
 
April 1 1, 2024  
   
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    I. INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................1 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................2 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  ......................................................5 
 IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 Category 1 – Utilization Management  ..............................................7 
 Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care  .......... 13 
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  ................................ 17 
 Categor y 4 – Member ’s Rights  ...................................................... 20 
 Category 5 – Quality Management  ................................................ 22 
 Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity  ............. 23 
  
 1 of 25 
 
 I. INTRODUCTION 
  AIDS Healthcare Foundation (AHF), founded in 1987, is a not -for-profit organization 
providing Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) treatment. AHF dba Positive Healthcare 
California (Plan) provides specialty health care for Medi -Cal members in Los Angeles 
County . 
 The Plan was established in California in 1995, under a Federal Waiver from the 
Department of Health and Human Services. The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS ) entered into an agreement with the Plan in 2012. The Plan is the first Managed 
Care Progr am in the county for Medicaid members diagnosed with Acquired 
Immun odeficien cy Syndrome (AIDS). Effective July 1, 2019, the Plan transitioned into a 
full-risk Medi -Cal Managed Care plan in Los Angeles County. The Plan is a licensed 
Knox -Keene Health Care S ervice Plan. 
 The Plan delivers care to eligible members who reside within their service areas and are at least 21 years old . 
 The Plan provides health care services designed around the needs of people living with stage three  HIV infection. The Plan has a comprehensive network of providers and 
offers the following contracted services: primary medical care (HIV specialists), specialty consultation, outp atient , radiology , laboratory, hospice, hospital inpatient , and 
mental healt h. On July 1, 2019, hospice and hospital inpatient services were added to 
the Contract .  
 The Plan delivers services to members through a delegated group and vendors or 
subcontractors.  
 The Plan is not accredited by the National Committee of Quality Assur ance for the 
Medi -Cal line of business.  
 As of September 1, 2023, the Plan had a total of 798 members as follows:  553 Medi -Cal 
and 245 Dual  Special Needs Plan members .  
   
 2 of 25 
 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
  This report presents the findings of the DHCS medical audit for the period of October 1, 
2022,  through September 30, 2023. The review was conducted from November 27, 
2023,  through December 8, 2023. The audit consisted of document review, verification 
studi es, and interviews with the Plan representatives.  
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on March 12 , 2024 . The Plan was allowed 
15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing the draft audit report findings. On March 28, 2024,  the Plan 
submitted a response after the Exit Conference. The result s of our eval uation of the 
Plan’s response are reflected in this report.  
 The audit evaluated six performance categories: Utilization Management  (UM), Case 
Management and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Members’ Rights , Quality Management  and Administrative and Organizational Capacity . 
 The prior DHCS medical audit for the period of January 1, 2022,  through  
September  30, 2022,  was issued on March 23, 2023 . The deficiencies identified in the 
audit report issued on July 14, 2022,  and the implementation of the Corrective Action 
Plan were review ed. 
 Findings denoted as repeat findings are uncorrected deficiencies substantially similar to those identified in the previous audit . 
 The summary of the findings by category is as follows:  
 Category 1 – Utilization Management  
The Plan is required to have a set of written criteria or guidelines for utilization review that is based on sound medical evidence, is consistently applied, regularly reviewed, and updated, and reasons for decisions are clearly documented. The Plan did not 
clearly document guidelines or criteria used for prior authorization determinations.  
The Plan is required to have policies and procedures to  ensure decisions are based on 
the medical necessity of proposed health care s ervices and are consistent with criteria 
or guidelines that are supported by clinical principles and processes.  The Plan did not 
ensure t hat prior authorization determinations were based on medical necessity.  
 The Plan is required to  notify members of a decision to deny, delay, or modify requests 
for prior authorization by providing a N otice of Action (NOA) t o members and/or their 
authorized representative.  The Plan did not notify members in writing of decisions to 
deny prior authorization requests.  
  
 3 of 25 
 
 Prior authorization requirements  shall not be applied  to emergency services, family 
planning services, preventive services, basic prenatal care, sexually transmitted disease services, and HIV  testing . The Plan incorrectly applied prior authorization requirements 
to preventive services.  
 Category 2 – Case Managem ent and Coordination of Care  
 The Plan is required to provide services to all members related to Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder  (SUD) . When a member’s screening is positive, validated 
assessment tools should be used to determine if unhealthy alcohol use or SUD is present.  In addition, brief interventions must include providing feedback to the member  
regarding screening and assessment results and discussing negative consequences that have occurred and the overall severity of the probl em. The Plan utilized incomplete 
validated assessment tools for members with positive SUD screening results.  
 The Plan is required to coordinate care with the county Mental Health Plan  (MHP) to 
deliver mental health care services to members. The Plan did n ot ensure the provision 
of coordination of care with Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health 
(LACDMH)  in the delivery of S pecialty Mental Health Services (SMHS) to members.  
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 The Plan is required to ensure that the member must have an approved Physician 
Certification Statement (PCS) form authorizing Non -Emergency Medical Transportation 
(NEMT ) by the provider.  The Plan did not ensure PCS forms were approved before 
services were rendered.  
 The Plan and all subcontractors are required to maintain all the books , records , and 
documents for a minimum of ten years . The Plan did not maintain records for Non -
Medical Transportation ( NMT ) services provided to members . 
 Category 4 – Member ’s Rights  
 The written record of grievances is required to be reviewed periodically by the Governing Body of the Plan, the Public Policy Body, and by an officer of the Plan or 
designee. The Plan did not ensure the Governing Body periodically reviewed the written 
record of grievances.  
 Category 5 – Quality Management  
 The Quality Improvement Committee (QIC)  is required to meet at least quarterly but as 
frequently as necessary to demonstrate follow -up on all findings and required actions.  
The Plan did not ensure its Quality Management Committee (QMC) met at least 
quarterly in accordance with the Contract requirements.  
  
 4 of 25 
 
 Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational C apacity  
 Member encounter data must provide for the collection and maintenance of sufficient 
member encounter data to identify the provider who delivers any items or services to 
members . The Plan did not ensure that rendering provider information in submitted 
encounter data was accurate and complete.  
   
 5 of 25 
 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  
  
SCOPE  
 The DHCS , Contract and Enrollment Review Division  conducted the audit to ascertain 
that medical services provided to the Plan members comply with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and the state Contract.  
 
PROCEDURE  
 The audit was conducted from November 27, 2023, through December 8, 2023. The 
audit included a review of the Plan’s Contract with DHCS, its policies for providing 
services, the procedures used to implement the policies, and verification studies of the implementation and effectiveness of those policies.  Documents were reviewed and 
interviews were conducted with the Plan administrators and staff.  
 The following verification studies were conducted:  
 Category 1 – Utilization Management  
 Prior Authorizations : A total of 34 medical authorizations , which included two concurrent 
and 32 denied and approved requests , were reviewed for timeliness, consistent 
application of criteria, appropriate review, and communication of results to providers and members. There was no retrospective,  modified, expedited, or  delegated  requests . 
 Appeal Procedures: The Plan did not have any  medical appeals for review for 
appropriateness and timeliness of decision making.  
 Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care  
 Mental Health and SUD : 19 records were reviewed for appropriateness , completeness 
and timeliness of services provided . 
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 NEMT and NMT: 20  records (ten  NEMT and ten  NMT) were reviewed to confirm 
compliance with transportation requirements for timeliness.  
 Category 4 – Member ’s Rights  
 Grievance Procedures: A total of 31  standard grievances ( 11 quality of care and 20 
quality  of service) were reviewed for timely resolution, response to complainant, and 
submission to the appropriate level for review. During the audit period, t he Plan did not 
have exempt  nor expedited grievances. In addition, 20 call inquiry logs were reviewed.  
 
 6 of 25 
 
 Category 5 – Quality Management  
 Potential Quality Issues: The Plan had t wo records which were reviewed to determine if 
effective action was taken to address needed improvement.  
 Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity  
 Encounter Data Review: Ten  records were reviewed to verify the Plan’s claims process  
and supporting documentation.  
 A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report.  
  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023, through December 8, 2023  
 
 7 of 25 
 
  
CATEGORY 1 - UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT  
 
 
1.2  
PRIOR AUTHORIZATION REVIEW  REQUIREMENTS  
 1.2.1. Documentation of Reasons for Medical Decisions   
 The Plan is required to ensure that its prior a uthorization, concurrent review , and 
retrospective review procedures meet the following minimum requirements: There is a set of written criteria or guidelines for utilization review that is based on sound medical evidence, is consistently applied, regularly reviewed, and updated; Reasons for decisions are clearly documented.  (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 5, Provision 2C and 
2D) 
 Plan policy and procedure, UM 35.3  PHC- CA Clinical Criteria and Guidelines , (revised 
07/22/2022) , state d the following procedure: The Plan shall document u tilization review 
criteria and guidelines utilized for organizational determinations providing clear rationale 
for denials that cite criteria.  
 Plan Standard Operating Procedure ( SOP ), 502.0  AHF Second Level and Medical 
Director Review, (revised 09/01/2022) , state d that staff are to document criteria utilized 
to make determination when referring cases either to  a Registered Nurse or the Medical 
Director for review . 
 Finding: The Plan did not clearly document guidelines or criteria used for prior 
authorization determinations.
 
A verification study of 34 prior authorization cases revealed that 20 cases had no documentation of the guidelines or criteria used to approve the requests. The Plan did not clearly document reasons for decisions on approved m edical prior authorizations 
and did not include any referenced guidelines, criteria, or other insight into its medical decision- making process in its prior authorization case files.  
The Plan, pursuant to its prior year C orrective Action Plan, updated its p olicy and 
procedure, Clinical Criteria and Guidelines ; however, this procedure did not address 
documenting the rationale for decisions that  are other than denials. In addition, SOP , 
AHF Second Level and Medical Director Review  did not address  document ing the 
reason for the decision on requests that can be approved by an authorization 
coordinator.  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 8 of 25 
 
 During the interview , the Plan stated that the criteria  for the decision in these cases 
were not document ed due to the staff not following policies and procedures  despite 
training.  Also, there appears to be a lack of monitoring of staff compliance with UM 
requirements.  
 This is a repeat of the prior year findi ng 1.2.3 Clear Documentation of Reasons for 
Medical Authorization Decisions.  
 When reasons for medical decisions are not clearly documented,  it is difficult to ensure 
that guidelines and criteria are being adhered to or that the clinical rationale for 
decisions is correct , which could  lead to poor decision making, substandard or 
unnecessary care, and u ltimately patient harm.  
 Recommendation: Develop and i mplement  policies and procedures  to ensure the staff 
clearly documents  reasons for all prior authorization decisions.  
  1.2.2. Authorization Decisions Based on Medical Necessity  
 The Plan is required to ensure that policies and procedures for authorization decisions are based on the Medical Necessity of a requested health care service and  are 
consistent with criteria or guidelines supported by sound clinical principles. (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 5,  (1)(I)(1)) 
 The Plan is required to have written policies and procedures establishing the process by which the Plan reviews and approves, modifies, delays, or denies, based in whole or in part on medical necessity, requests of health care services. These policies and procedures shall ensure that decisions based on the medical necessity of proposed health care services are consistent with criteria or guidelines that are supported by clinical principles and processes. (Health and Safety (H&S) c ode, section 1367.01b)  
 Plan policy and p rocedure,  UM 22.7  PHC- CA Authorization Referral  Process,  (revised 
10/20/2023) , stated that requested health care services may be approved by UM staff 
who are not qualified health care professionals only when: the U M staff is under the 
supervision of an appropriately licensed health professional; there are explicit UM  
criteria; and no clinical judge ment is required.  
 The Plan’s SOP , 502.0 .0 AHF Second Level and Medical Director Review , (revised 
09/01/2022) , stated the categories of services that a first level non- clinician reviewer 
may approve include diagnostic services such as magnetic resonance imaging  and 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 9 of 25 
 
 compute d tomography  scans, cardiac testing, sleep studies, or d urable medical 
equipment  under $500.  
 Finding:  The Plan did not ensure that prior authorization determinations were based on 
medical necessity.  
The Plan’s SOP, 502.0 AHF Second Level and Medical Director Review , allows for non-
clinicians to approve services without any documentation of medical necessity. The SOP stated that the categories of services that a first level non- clinician reviewer may 
approve include diagnostic services such as magnetic resonance imaging and 
compute d tomography scans, cardiac testing, sleep studies, or d urable medical 
equipment under $500.  However, there were no associated requirements for approval, 
such as diagnosis code or other clinical information that would demonstrate the medical necessity for the requested service.  
In a verification study, three of 34 prior authorization cases indicated that services were approved without clinical documentation to support medical necessity.  
In an interview, the Plan confirmed that non- clinicians may approve services in 
accordance with SOP, 502.0 AHF Second Level and Medical Director Review , without  
any requirements for clinical doc umentation or any corresponding diagnosis codes . 
Furthermore, the Plan's Medical Director acknowledged that there is no medical necessity review done at the first level review for authorization determinations. If these cases are approved there is no additi onal review.  
Without ensuring medical necessity is met for approved procedures, the risks of patient harm and fraud, waste, or abuse are increased.  
 Recommendation:  Develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure that 
prior authorization  determinations including approvals are based on medical necessity.  
  1.2.3. Written Notification of P rior Authorization Decisions  
 The Plan is required to  notify members of a decision to deny, delay, or modify requests 
for prior authorization, in accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 
42, section  438.210(c) and C alifornia Code of R egulations (CCR) , Title 22, sections 
51014.1 and 53894 by providing a N otice of A ction (NOA)  to Members and/or their 
authorized representative, regarding any denial, delay or modification of a request for approval to provide a health care service. ( Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 13 (7) (A))  
 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023, through December 8, 2023  
 
 10 of 25 
 
 The Plan’s records, including any NOA , shall meet the retention requirements described 
in Exhibit E, Attachment 2, Provision 20, Audit. (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 5 (2)(I))  
 Responses regarding decisions to deny, delay, or modify health care services 
requested by providers prior to, retrospectively, or concurrent with the provision of 
health care services to members shall be communicated to the member in writing, and 
to providers initially by telephone or facsimile, except with regard to decisions rendered 
retrospectively, and then in writing, and shall include a clear and concise explanation of 
the reasons for the Plan’s decision, a description of the criteria or guidelines used, and 
the clinical reasons for the decisions regarding medical necessity. ( H&S c ode, section 
1367.01(h)(4) ) 
 Plan policy and p rocedure, UM 22.7 PHC- CA Authorization Referral  Process, (revised 
10/20/2023) , state d that the U M Department communicates decisions to modify, delay 
or deny health care services (adverse determinations) to members  in writing, and to 
providers initially by telephone or facsimile, except regarding decisions rendered retrospectively, and then in writing.  In addition, it includes a clear and concise 
explanation of the reasons for the decision, a description of the criteria or guidelines used, and the clinical reasons for the decisions regarding medical necessity. The appropriate DHCS -standardized NOA templ ate, accompanied by the DHCS -
standardized NOA “ Your Rights ” template, is utilized for this communication.  
 Finding:  The Plan did not notify members in writing of decisions to deny prior 
authorization requests.  
 A verification study showed that in three of six denied prior authorization requests , the 
Plan did not send members written notices to inform them of the denials.  
 Plan policy and p rocedure, Authorization Referral  Process was not consistently  followed  
by staff during the audit period . 
 During the interview, the Plan acknowledged that there was a defect in its eQSuite 
software  system that prevented the generation of NOA letters for administrative denials , 
such as in cases where the deni al was  due to l ack of m edical information.  In another  
case, the Plan confirmed that the NOA  letter had been voided and could not be 
retrieved from the system. Despite a request during the interview, t he Plan was unable 
to provide evidence that the  NOA  letter  was sent to the member  to inform them of their 
appeal and state fair hearing rights .  
If the Plan does not notify members in writing of decisions to deny prior authorization requests, this can lead to adverse health effects since members will not receive 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 11 of 25 
 
 information on their right to appeal for a reco nsideration of covered and medically 
necessary services.  
Recommendation:  Implement policies and procedures to ensure that the Plan notifies 
members in writing of decisions to deny prior authorization requests.  
  1.2.4. Prior Authorization for Preventive Services  
 Prior authorization requirements  shall not be applied  to emergency services, family 
planning services, preventive services, basic prenatal care, sexually transmitted disease services, and human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV) testing. (Contract, Exhibit A, 
Attachment 5(2)(H))  
 Plan policy and p rocedure,  UM 21.3  PHC- CA Access to Self -Referred Covered 
Services,  (revised 10/05/2023) , listed  covered services available to members without 
prior authorization, including primary care visits and urgent or emergency care services . 
 Plan policy and p rocedure,  CM 44. 2 PHC- CA Adult Preventive Services , (revised 
03/23/2023) , state d that members are to receive preventive services identified as U nited 
States  Preventive Services Task Force “ A” and “B” recommendations in accordance 
with their individual risk factors.  
 Finding:  The Plan incorrectly applied prior authorization requirements to preventive 
services.   
 During the audit period, the Plan applied prior authorization requirements  for preventive 
services such as low dose computed tomography scans for lung cancer screening and 
colonoscopies for colon cancer screenings. A verification study identified  five out of 3 4 
files where prior authorization was incorrectly applied to preventive cancer screening 
services.  
 A review of the Plan policies and Provider Manual showed no information stating that preventive care is exempt from prior authorization. Plan policy and p rocedure,  Access to 
Self-Referred Covered Services  did not include preventive services in this policy. In 
addition, the Plan p olicy and p rocedure for Adult Preventive Services  did not state that 
these services are  exempt from prior authorization requirements. Similarly, the Plan ’s 
2018 and 2024 Provider Manual s did not include preventive services in the list of 
services exempt from prior authorization.   
 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 12 of 25 
 
 During the interview, the Plan stated that preventive services did not require prior authorization and that the Plan has a form letter to notify when a service does not require prior authorization. However, the verification study files showed that the notification letters for preventive services did not indicate an exemption from prior 
authorization. Instead, they indicated the application of prior authorization procedures and formal approval.   When prior authorization is required for preventive services, it may create a barrier for 
members to obtain necessary screenings in a timely manner , potentially delaying 
appropriate medical diagnosis and treatment.   Recommendation:  Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure that the 
Plan does not apply prior authorization to  preventive services.  
    
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023, through December 8, 2023  
 
 13 of 25 
 
  
CATEGORY 2 – CASE MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION OF CARE  
 
 
2.5  
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER 
 2.5.1 Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder Validat ed Assessment  Tools  for 
Positive Screening  
 The Plan is required to provide services to all members related to Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder (S UD). (Contract Exhibit A, Attachment 10, provision 6 D)  
 When a screening is positive, validated assessment tools should be used to determine if unhealthy alcohol use or SUD is present. Validated alcohol and drug assessment tools 
may be used without first using validated screening tools. Validated assessment tools include, but are not limited to:  
●  National Institute on Drug Abuse- Modified Alcohol, Smoking and Substance  
    Involvement Screening Test  
●  Drug Abuse Screening Test 20  
●  Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test  
For member s with brief assessments that reveal unhealthy alcohol use, brief misuse 
counseling should be offered. Appropriate referral for additional evaluation and treatment, including medications for addiction treatment, must be offered to member s 
whose brief assessment demonstrates probable A lcohol Use D isorder  or SUD. ( All Plan 
Letter (APL) 21-014, Alcohol and Drug Screening, Assessment, Brief Interventions and 
Referral to Treatmen t) 
Plan policy and procedure, UM 34.6 V PHC- CA Substance Use Disorder Treatment 
Services,  (revised 10/13/23), stated the following:  
●  When a screening is positive, validated assessment tools such as Drug Abuse  
     Screening Tool and Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test should be used  
     to determine if a SUD is present.   
●  When a screening is positive, validated assessment tools should be used to  
    det ermine if unhealthy alcohol use or SUD is present.    
●  The Plan provides appropriate referrals for additional evaluation and      
    treatment.  
●  Also, the Plan provides brief interventions , which include: Providing feedback  
    to the member regarding screening and assessment results; Discuss  
    consequences which may have occurred due to substance use and the  
    overall severity of the problem; Assess member s for readiness to change or    
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 14 of 25 
 
    motivation to engage in treatment services, if  appropriate.  
 
Finding: The Plan utilized incomplete validated assessment tools for members with 
positive SUD screening results.  
 The Plan has a Specialty Mental Health Services  (SMHS), Non -Specialty Mental Health 
Services (NSMHS), and Substance Use Disorder Services (SUDS) End- to-End Care 
Management Workflow that outlined  the intake and screening for alcohol and SUD.  
The Assessment process reflected in the workflow required  the fo llowing: Registered 
Nurse Case Team Manager (RNCTM) to complete the Health Risk Assessment Tool, Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ) -2 and PHQ -9. Then, the member is referred to 
appropriate Behavioral Health S ervices (Delegated group or Department of Mental  
Health (DMH) ). The validation process requires RNCTM to confirm that the member is 
receiving behavioral health services  and is engaged in care.  However, this workflow d id 
not incorporate a process for conducting a validat ed assessment  and brief intervent ion 
procedure for members who were  screened positive for alcohol use or SUD . 
 A review of verification files revealed five out of 19 samples indicated that members were 
screened with positive SUD using the Cut, Annoyed, Guilty and Eye AID S creening Tool 
included in the Health Risk Assessment (HRA).  There were incomplete validated 
assessments for members with positive SUD screening during the audit period. A review of the Plan documentation and verification files indicated that the Plan’s procedures were deficient in determining unhealthy alcohol use or SUD . 
 During the interview, the Plan staff stated that alcohol and SUD scree ning are embedded 
in the HRA and its procedure is to screen during the HRA within 45 days, annually, and if required it can be repeated. A review of the HRA and  Alcohol Use Disorder Identification 
Test C+2 tools contained incomplete validated assessment questionnaires.  
 When the Plan utilizes incomplete validated assessment tools for members with a positive screening result , it may lead to missed opportunities to engage member s in 
treatment services.  
 Recommendation: Implement policies and procedures to ensure the Plan utilizes 
complete validated assessment tools for members with positive alcohol and SUD 
screening.  
     
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 15 of 25 
 
 2.5.2 Care Coordination 
 The Contract state d the Memorandum of Understanding ( MOU ) is required to specify, 
the respective responsibilities of the Plan and the MHP in delivering Medically 
Necessary Covered Services and Specialty Mental Health Services ( SMHS ) to 
members. The MOU shall address p rotocols for the delivery of SMHS , including t he 
MHP ’s provision of clinical consultation to the Plan for members being treated by the 
Plan for mental illness; Protocols and procedures for the exchange of medical records 
information, including procedures for maintaining the confidentiality of medical records. 
(Contract Exhibit A, Attachment 12 , Provision 3A)  
 The Plan and c ounty M HPs must implement procedures to deliver care and coordinate 
services for all members. ( CFR, Title 42 , section 438.208(b))  
 The Plan is required to coordinate with MHPs to facilitate care transitions and guide referrals for members receiving NSMHS to transition to an SMHS provider and vice versa, ensuring that the referral loop is closed and the new provider accepts the care of  
the member. Such decisions should be made via a member centered shared decision-
making process. (APL 22- 005, No Wrong Door for Mental Health Services Policy ) 
 The MOU section related to coordination of care stated the Plans are required to provide medical case management and cover and pay for all medically necessary Medi -
Cal covered physical health care services for a member receiving SMHS. The Plan is required to coordinate care with the MHP. (APL 22 -006, Medi -Cal Managed Care Health 
Plan Responsibilities for Non- Specialty Mental Health Services)  
 The MOU between the Plan and LACDMH, ( effective 07/01/2019) , contained a 
description of the coordination of care and collaboration agreements as noted in, but are 
not limited to the following:  
●  An Interdisciplinary Team will be assigned to coordinate a member’s care  
    when necessary, as determined by mutually agreed upon protocols.  
●  There will be a facilitation of continuity of care, including shared treatment  
     plans for members receiving both the Plan and the MHP’s mental health            
     services.  
●  Both parties will have assigned staff available to each other during their hours  
    of operation.  
 Plan policy and p rocedure,  CM 97.2  PHC- CA Exchange of information with the 
LACDMH to Facilitate Care Coordination of Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder 
Treatment , (revised 08/31/2023),  stated the Plan shall maintain a process for m embers 
to access all Non- Specialty Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder covered 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 16 of 25 
 
 services, includ ing coordinated care for all SMHS and SUD services and provide 
referrals including mechanisms to track completion of follow up visits, to the county MHP. In addition , the Plan shall ensure care coordination with LACDMH as follows: T o 
carry out the provision of all m edically necessary covered services; When the Plan is 
determined to be responsible for covered BHS, the Plan shall initiate, provide, and maintain ongoing care coordination as mutually agreed upon in the M OU with the 
LACDMH; Transition of care is  provided for members transiting to or from the Plan or 
LACDMH.  
 Finding: The Plan did not ensure the provision of coordination of care with LACDMH in 
the delivery of SMHS  to members . 
 The Plan did not implement its policies and procedures for the provision of coordination 
of care to deliver SMHS to members, including the implementation of MOU elements. The Plan did not furnish:  
●   Documentary evidence showing that after referring a me mber for SMHS, the  
     Plan reaches out to the LACDMH or accepts and monitors the LACDMH’s  
     reports.  
●   Documentary evidence showing compliance with MOU components such as:  
     coordination of care between the Plan and LACDMH.  
 
Plan policy and procedure,  PHC- CA Exchange of information with the LACDMH to 
Facilitate Care Coordination of Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Treatment  
for coordination of care between the Plan and the LACDMH was not implemented. In addition, no communication occurred between the LACDMH and the care coordination 
team for members who were referred by the Plan to LACDMH or members who directly self-referred to LACDMH during audit period.  
 In an interview, the Plan stated that it notifies members to self -refer to the LACDMH to 
obtain SMHS. In addition, the last member communication the Plan had with LACDMH 
staff was in December 2022,  and it did not have an assigned staff from LACDMH to 
communicate members’ care.  
 When the Plan does not ensure the provision of coordination of SMHS  to members, this 
may lead to delayed or missed mental health services resulting in poor mental health outcomes.  
 Recommendation:  Implement policies and procedures to ensure the Plan and 
LACDMH are coordinating SMHS  to members.  
  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023, through December 8, 2023  
 
 17 of 25 
 
   
CATEGORY 3 – ACCESS AND AVAILABILITY  OF CARE  
  
3.8  
NON- EMERGENCY MEDICAL TRANSPORTATION  
NON- MEDICALTRANSPORTATION 
 3.8.1 Physician Certified Statement   
 The Plan is required to comply with all existing final Policy Letters and APLs  issued by 
DHCS. (Contract Exhibit E, Attachment 2)  
 The Plan is required to ensure that the member must have an approved PCS form 
authorizing NEMT by the provider. For M edi-Cal managed care health plan (MCP) 
covered services requiring recurring appointments, MCPs must provide authorization for NEMT for the duration of the recurring appointments, not to exceed 12 months.  (APL 
22-008, Non-Emergency Medical and N on-Medical Transportation Services and  Related 
Travel Expenses ) 
Plan policy and p rocedure, CM 43.7  PHC- CA Transportation Benefit , (revised 
06/29/2023) , state d the  Plan must have a completed and executed PCS form on file for 
all NEMT services that require prior authorization.  The members  must have an 
approved PCS form authorizing NEMT by the provider. The PCS form must be completed by the provider requesting NEMT services for the member.  
Finding: The Plan did not ensure PCS forms were approved before NEMT services were rendered.  
The Plan did not consistently apply its policy , PHC- CA Transportation Benefit  requiring 
completed PCS forms before rendering NEMT services. A review of verification study cases revealed that in two out of ten NEMT sampled, the PCS forms were completed after services were rendered. In one case, the service date was March 13, 2023, w hile 
the PCS form certified the period from March 15, 2023, two days after the NEMT 
service was provided. In another case, the service date was March 17, 2023, while the PCS form was incomplete and signed on November 16, 2023.  
During the interview , the Pla n stated that the Member Services Department did not 
ensure the PCS forms were on file before allowing for the scheduling of NEMT services.  
Additionally, the U M Department, did not verify PCS forms, maintain a PCS Form 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 18 of 25 
 
 Tracker, and follow the Plan ’s policies and procedures of quarterly submission of PCS 
Form Tracker reports to the UM Committee for monitoring purposes.  
 After the interview, the Plan’s Member Services Department resubm itted an NEMT log 
that included a column indicating the PCS form verification status. This highlighted that 
several provided NEMT services were missing  PCS forms. The U M Department 
explained that the failure to obtain and verify PCS forms for the sampled cases was due to the physician ’s limited availability and the Member Services D epartment ’s leadership 
change.  
 Without obtaining PCS forms before providing NEMT trips, th e Plan cannot  determine 
the appropriate level of service for Medi -Cal members .  
 Recommendation: Implement  policies and procedures to ensure PCS forms are 
approved before the NEMT services are rendered to the member.  
  3.8.2 Maintain ing NMT Service Records  
 The Plan and all subcontractors are required to maintain all of the books , records , and 
documents for a minimum of ten years from the final date of the Contract period or from the date of completion of any audit , whichever is later. (Exhibit E, Attachment 2, 
provision 20B)  
 The Plan and subcontractor must retain and are required to retain the data, information, 
and documentation for a period of no less than  ten years. ( CFR, Title 42 , section 
438.416)  
 Plan policy and p rocedure,  CM 43.7  PHC- CA Transportation Benefit , (revised 
06/29/2023) , stated i f an NMT request comes through Member Services, the 
Transportation Coordinator verifies the member to be going to or returning home from a 
medical appointment, medical facility, pharmacy, etc., that will render or has rendered a Medi -Cal covered service.  
 The Plan’s documentation and monitoring process noted in Workflows for NEMT and NMT Services  stated that all relevant information, including member and service details, 
is recorded in NEMT logs by the Member Services Transportation Coordinator. The Director of Member Services and their designee (Supervisor, Manager of Member Services) monitor the log for completion, and logs are maintained and monitored to 
ensure compliance.  
 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 19 of 25 
 
 Finding: The Plan did not maintain records for NMT services provided  to members . 
 A review of two out of ten NMT verification study files indicated that the Plan was 
missing  records to support the existence and accuracy of services provided. For t he two 
sampled files, the NMT  log indicated th at trips were completed by the Plan; however, 
there were no call documentation or invoices available to support that these trips were 
rendered.  
 A review of the p olicy and p rocedure,  PHC- CA Transportation Benefit  indicated that t he 
Plan’s Member Services D epartment is mandated to maintain detailed records of all 
transportation services, including trip status, dates, service type, and any related information, for documentation and reporting purposes ; however, review of verification 
files indicated that procedures were not followed by the staff as there were two missing 
records.  
 During the interview , the Plan confirmed that for the two sampled files , NMT services 
were provided, and payment s were made to the contracted provider. The Plan 
acknowledged that it did not maintain records and documents for these trips due to 
entry error s.  
 The absence of documentation may hinder DHCS from verifying the validity of services rendered to the member.  
 Recommendation:  Implement policies and procedures to ensure NMT records  are 
maintained for services provided to members.  
  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023, through December 8, 2023  
 
 20 of 25 
 
  
CATEGORY 4 – MEMBER ’S RIGHTS  
 
 
4.1  
GRIEVANCE SYSTEM  
 4.1.1 Grievance Records Oversight  
 The Plan is required to implement and maintain procedures for grievances and the 
expedited review of g rievances required under CFR, Title 42, sections  438.402, 406, 
and 408, CCR, Title 28, sections 1300.68 and 1300.68.01, and CCR,  Title 22, section 
53858. (Contract , Exhibit A, Attachment 14(2))  
 The Grievance and Appeal System is required to operate in accordance with all applicable federal regulations, state laws, and state regulations. The Plan must maintain a written record for each grievance and appeal received by the Plan. The record of each grievance and appeal must be maintained in a log with information such as a description of the complaint or problem and action taken to investigate and resolve the grievance or appeal. The written record of grievances and appeals is required to be reviewed periodically by the Governing Body of the Plan, the Public Policy Body, and by an officer of the Plan or designee. The review is required to be thoroughly documented. (APL 21 -011, Grievance and Appeal Requirements, Notice and “ Your Rights ” 
Templates)   
 A written record shall be made for each grievance received by the Plan, including the date received, the Plan representative recording the grievance, a summary or other document describing the grievance, and its disposition. The written record of grievances shall be reviewed periodically by the Governing Body of the Plan, the Public Policy Body created pursuant to CCR, Title 28, section 1300.69, and by an officer of the Plan or his designee. This review shall be thoroughly documented. (CCR, Title 28, sectio n 1300.68 
(b)(5))  
 Plan policy and p rocedure, RM 7.4  PHC- CA Enrollee Grievance Process , (revised 
09/13/2023) , state d a written record is maintained for each grievance. Grievance 
documentation captures all the elements required to be reported in accordance with 
state and federal reporting requirements. The monitoring section state d that grievance 
data are submitted periodically to the Executi ve Oversight Committee (EOC ) for review 
and to the P ubic Policy Body. 
 Finding: The Plan did not ensure the Governing Body periodically reviewed the written 
record of grievances.  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 21 of 25 
 
 The Plan’s Governing Body delegates it functions to the EOC.  
 Plan policy and p rocedure,  PHC- CA Enrollee Grievance Process  did not address 
presenting of the written record of grievances to the EOC for review.  
 A review of committee meeting minutes indicated that the Plan did not have documentation to support that the EOC conducted a review of the written records of 
grievances . The Plan did not ensure that committees followed the APL requirements 
and policies and procedur es. 
 During the interview, the Plan acknowledged that the EOC did not review the written 
record of grievances during the audit period due to the oversight of the staff.  
 When the Plan’s Governing Body  or EOC  does not periodically review the written record 
of grievances, this may result in the Plan’s inability to make timely interventions to 
remedy problems identified and provide quality of care and services to members.  
 Recommendation: Implement policies and procedures to ensure that the 
Governing Body  periodically reviews the written record of grievances.  
   
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023, through December 8, 2023  
 
 22 of 25 
 
  
CATEGORY 5 – QUALITY MANAGEMENT  
 
 
5.1  
QUALITY IMPROVEMENT SYSTEM  
 5.1.1. Quality Management  Committee    
 The Quality Improvement Committee ( QIC) is required to meet at least quarterly but as 
frequently as necessary to demonstrate follow -up on all findings and required actions. 
(Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 4 (4) (B))  
 Plan policy and p rocedure, QM 1.4  PHC- CA Quality Improvement Program , (revised 
10/27/2023) , state d that, at the very minimum, the Q MC meets on a quarterly basis  
(The QMC functions as the Plan’s QIC) . The QMC reviews highlights of the quality 
improvement activities quarterly and identifies opportunities for improvement.  
 The Plan’s 2023 Quality Management Committee (Q MC) Charter state d that the 
committee is to meet at least quarterly.  
 Finding:  The Plan did not ensure its Q MC met at least quarterly in accordance with the 
Contract requirements.   The Plan did not fully implement its policies and procedures requiring its QM C to meet 
quarterly. The Plan's QMC only met twice during the audit period, on December 12, 2022, and March 27, 2023.  During the interview, the Plan was asked whether a QMC meeting was held around June 2023. The Plan stated that the QMC did not meet at that time because of absentee members. In addition, in a written response, the Plan stated that the QMC ’s 
next meeting was scheduled for December 11, 2023. Therefore, the Plan only had two QMC meetings scheduled during the audit period.  
 When the Plan ’s QMC does not meet on a regular basis, the Plan may miss 
opportunit ies to identify and act upon quality improvement issues  in a timely manner, 
which may result in members receiving substandard care. 
 Recommendation:  Implement policies and procedures to ensure that the QMC meets 
at least quarterly to maintain oversight of its Quality Improvement Program  and to fulfill 
the Contract requirements . 
 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023, through December 8, 2023  
 
 23 of 25 
 
   
CATEGORY 6 – ADMINISTRATIVE AND ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY  
  
6.3  
ENCOUNTE R DATA REVIEW  
 6.3.1 Encounter Data Reporting 
 The Plan is required to implement policies and procedures for ensuring complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely submission of encounter data to DHCS for all items 
and services furnished to a m ember under th e Contract, whether directly or through 
subcontr acts or other arrangements, including capitated Providers. ( Contract, Exhibit E, 
Attachment 3, 2(B))   The Plan is required to maintain a M anagement Information System that collects and 
reports encounter data to DHCS in compliance with CFR, Title 42, section 438.242, and 
pursuant to applicable DHCS APLs. (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 3, 2 .A) 
 Member encounter  data must provide for the following: C ollection and maintenance of 
sufficient member  encounter data to identify the provider who delivers any items or 
services to members ; Submission of member  encounter data to the state at a frequency 
and level of detail to be specified by C enters for Medicar e and Medicaid Services  and 
the State, based on program administration, oversight, and program integrity needs.  
(CFR, Title 42, section 438.242 (c)(1)  and (2))  
 Unless otherwise specified in the Contract, the Plan is required to comply with all current and applicable provisions of the Medi -Cal Provider Manual, unless the Medi -Cal 
Provider Manual conflicts with the Contract, APLs, and/or any applicable federal or state laws, regulations, in which case the specific terms of the Contract, the APL, or the appli cable law will apply. (Contract, Exhibit E, Attachment 3, 1.D(2) and 1.E)  
 Reimbursement for services rendered by a Physician Assistant ( PA) can be made only 
to the employing physician, organized outpatient clinic or hospital outpatient department. Providers must indicate the appropriate PA modifier “U7” in conjunction with the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) or Current Proce dural Terminology code when the service was performed by a PA. In addition to 
this PA modifier, the modifier code “99” may also apply to PA services, creating a multiple modifier condition. (Medi -Cal Provider Manual - Billing and Reimbursement, 
non ph 3; P age updated: March 2023) 
 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 24 of 25 
 
 Plan policy and p rocedure,  MC IT 2.2  PHC- CA Encounter Data Submission for 
Managed Care , (revised 09/07/2023) , stated  the Plan shall ensure the completeness, 
accuracy, reasonability, and timeliness of all subcontractor encounter data regardless of whether a subcontractor is reimbursed on a fee- for-service or capitated basis . In 
addition, the Compliance Officer or designee and the Associate Director of Electronic 
Data Information and Data Analytics or designee review Quality Measures for 
Encounter Data R eports, Monthly Encounter Data Reports, Quarterly Stoplight Reports, 
and other internal reports related to completeness, accuracy, reasonability,  and 
timeliness measures . 
 Finding: The Plan did not ensure that rendering provider information in its submitted 
encounter data was accurate and complete.  
 A verification study revealed that in three out of ten samples, the rendering provider information in encounter data submitted to DHCS was inaccurate and incomplete. These were the issues identified:  
• In one of t he samples, according to the medical record, a service was 
rendered by a PA and reviewed and signed off by a physician. However, a different physician’s name was reported in the encounter data.  
• In three samples, the encounter data did not contain appropri ate PA modifiers 
“U7” or “99” to indicate these services were rendered by PAs.  
 Plan policy and procedure,  PHC- CA Encounter Data Submission for Managed Care 
does not include the requirements for reporting rendering provider information for verification purposes. Furthermore, this policy does not include the requirement to apply the Medi -Cal Provider Manual requirements to report the appropriate PA modifiers “U 7” 
or “99” to indicate that these services were rendered by PAs.  
 The Plan provided a written response stating that the Medi -Cal Provider Manual directs 
billing for services rendered by PA under physician supervision, allowing subcontractors to list superv ising physicians as the rendering providers in encounter data instead of the 
PA. A review of three out of ten  cases indicated that HCPCS modifier U7 and 99 was 
missing to indicate that care was provided by a PA per the Provider Manual instructions. 
The Plan did not follow the Provider Manual billing instructions to completeness when 
submitting encounter data report related to services provided by rendering providers.  
 When  the Plan does not report accurate and complete provider information in encount er 
data, DHCS will not have the right foundation for tracking healthcare quality and costs, monitoring population health and affordability trends, and identifying gaps in care.   
  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS Healthcare Foundation dba Positive Healthcare California   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022,  through September 30, 2023  
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023  
 
 25 of 25 
 
 Recommendation:  Revise and i mplement  policies and procedures to ensure the 
accuracy and completeness of encounter data report s related to rendering provider 
information.  
 
 
 
 
       
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION   
LOS ANGELES SECTION  
  
REPORT ON THE STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES AUDIT OF  
AIDS HEALTHCARE FOUNDATION  dba 
POSITIVE HEALTHCARE CALIFORNIA  
 
2023 
 
Contract Number s:  
  
20-10355  and 22-20459  
 
Audit Period:  
    
Dates of Audit:      
Report Issued:  
 October 1, 202 2 
    through  
September 30, 202 3 
 
 
November 27, 2023  
    through  
December 8, 2023  
  April 1 1, 2024  
 
   
 
 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    I. INTRODUCTION  .............................................................................1 
 Il. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  ...................................................2 
   
 
 
 1 of 2 I. INTRODUCTION 
  This report presents the results of the audit of AIDS  Healthcare Foundation dba Positive 
Health care California  (Plan)  compliance and implementation of the State Supported 
Services Contract with the State of California. The C ontract s cover abortion services with 
the Plan.  
 The audit covered the review period from October 1 , 202 2, through September 30, 202 3. 
The audit was conducted from November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023,  and 
consisted of document ation review  and interviews with the Plan staff. 
 The Plan delivers care to eligible members  who reside within their service area and are at 
least 21 year s old with  an acquired immunodeficiency syndrome diagnosis.  
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on March 12, 202 4. No deficiencies were noted 
during the review period.  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: AIDS  Healthcare Foundation dba Positiv e Healthcare California  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: October 1, 2022 , through September 30, 202 3 
DATE S OF AUDIT: November 27, 202 3, through December 8, 202 3 
 
 2 of 2  
STATE SUPPORT ED SERVICES  
 The Plan is required to provide, or arrange to provide, to eligible members the following 
State Supported Servi ces: Current Procedur al Terminology  (CPT) Codes: 59840 
through 59857 and Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Common 
Procedure Coding System  Codes: X1516, X1518, X7724, X7726,  and Z0336  (State 
Supported Services Contract , Exhibit A)  
 Abortion services are a covered benefit in the Medi -Cal program as a Physician Service. 
The Plan is required to cover abortion services, as well as the medical services and supplies incidental or preliminary to an abortion, consistent with the requirements. The Plan and network providers and subcontractors are prohibited from requiring medical 
justification or imposing any utilization management or utilization review requirements, 
including prior authorization and the coverage of outpatient abortion services. (All Plan 
Letter  (APL)  22-022, Abortion Services)  
 Plan policy and p rocedure,  UM 36.0 PHC- CA Abortion Services  (revised 01/19/2023) , 
stated the Plan covers abortion services, as well as medical service and supplies 
incidental  or preliminary to an abortion, consistent with the requirement s detailed in the 
Medi -Cal Provider Manua l; the network providers and any subcontractors are prohibited 
from requ iring medical justification in accordance with APL 22- 022 requirements . 
 The Plan maintains a list of CPT and CMS Common Procedure Coding System codes 
required for pregnancy termination that the Plan’s Claims Department uses for claims processing.  
 A request for verification  study revealed that the Plan did not have any claims related to 
State Supported Services during the audit period.  A review of documentation and 
interview s indicated no deficiencies  were noted during the audit period.  
 Recommendation:  None.  
  
