    
California Department of Health Care Services                                                                    
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division    
P.O. Box 997413 | Sacramento , CA | 95899-7413  
MS 4400  | Phone ( 916) 449-5000  | www. dhcs.ca.gov  State of California  
Gavin Newsom, Governor   
California Health and Human Services Agency  
 
 November 2, 2023   Kristen Cerf , Chief Executive Officer and President  
Blue Shield of California Promise Health Plan  
3840 Kilroy Airport Way  
Long Beach, CA 90806- 2452  
   RE:  Department of Health Care Services Medical Audit     
 
 
Dear Ms. Cerf: 
 The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS), Audits and Investigations Division conducted an on- site Medical Audit of Blue Shield of California Promise Health Plan, a 
Managed Care Plan (MCP), from April 17, 2023 through April 27, 2023.  The audit 
covered the period of April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023.  
  
The items were  evaluated and DHCS accepts the MCP’s submitted Corrective Action 
Plan (CAP). The CAP is hereby closed. The enclosed documents will serve as DHCS’ final response to the MCP’s CA P. Closure of this CAP does not halt any other 
processes in place between DHCS and the MCP regarding the deficiencies in the audit report or elsewhere, nor does it preclude the DHCS from taking additional actions it deems necessary regarding these deficiencies.  
 Please be advised that in accordance with Health & Safety Code Section 1380(h) and the Public Records Act, the final audit report and final CAP remediation document (final Attachment A) will be made available on the DHCS website and to the public upon request.  
  
If you have any questions, please reach out to CAP Compliance personnel.  
 Sincerely,  
 [Signature on file]
 
 Lyubov Poonka, Chief  
Audit Monitoring Unit  
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division  
 
 
  Department of Health Care Services Department of Health Care Services   Enclosures:  Attachment A (CAP Response Form)  
   cc:      Stacy Nguyen, Chief  
Managed Care Monitoring Branch Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division  
Department of Health Care Services  
 Anthony Martinez , Lead Analyst   
Audit Monitoring Unit  
Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division  
Department of Health Care Services  
 
Chengchoi Saelee, Contract Manager  
 Medi -Cal Managed Care Division  
Department of Health Care Services  
   
  
 
ATTACHMENT A 
Corrective Action Plan Response Form  
 
Plan : Blue Shield of California Promise Health Plan          Review Period:  04/01/22 – 03/31/23 
 Audit  Type:  Medical Audit                         On-site Review:  04/17/23 – 04/27/23 
 
 
 MCPs are required to provide a CAP and respond to all documented deficiencies  included in  the medical  audit report within 30 calendar days , unless an alternative 
timeframe is indicated in the CAP Request letter.  MCPs are required to submit the CAP  in Word format that will reduce turnaround time for DHCS to complete its 
review.  According to ADA requirement, the document should be at least 12 pt.  
 The CAP submission must include a written statement identifying the deficiency and describing the plan of action taken to cor rect the deficiency, and the 
operational results of that action.  The MCP shall directly address each deficiency component by c ompleting the following columns provided for MCP response: 1. 
Finding Number and Summary , 2. Action Taken, 3. Implementation Documentation, and 4. Completion/Expected Completion Date. The MCP will be required to 
include project timeline with milestones in a separate document for each finding. Supporting documentation should accompany each Action Taken. If supporting documentation is missing, the MCP submission will not be accepted.  For policies and other documentation that have been revised, please highlight the new 
relevant text, and include additional detail such as title of the document, page number, revision date, etc. in the column “Supporting Documentation” to assist 
DHCS in identifying any updates that were made by the plan.   For deficiencies that require short -term corrective action, implementation should be completed within 
30 calendar days. For deficiencies that may be reasonably determined to require long- term corrective action  for a period longer than 30 days to completely remedy 
or operationalize, the MCP is to indicate that it has initiated remedial action and is on the way towards achieving an accept able level of compliance.  In those 
instances, the MCP will be required in addition to the above steps, to include the date when full compliance will be achieved.   Policies and procedures submitted 
during the CAP process must still be sent to the MCP’s Contract Manager for review and approval, as applicable in accordance with exis ting requirements.  
 Please note, DHCS expects the plan to take swift action to implement improvement interventions as proposed in the CAP, theref ore DHCS encourages 
all remediation efforts to be in place no later than month 6 of the CAP, unless prior approval for an extended implementation effort is granted by DHCS.  
 DHCS will maintain close communication with the MCP throughout the CAP process and provide technical assistance to ensure the MCP provides sufficient 
documentation to correct deficiencies.  Depending on the volume and complexity of deficiencies identified, DHCS may require the MCP to provide weekly updates, as applicable.  
 
  
 - 2 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting 
Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
6. Administrative and Organizational Capacity  
6.2.1 Timely 
Notification  
 The Plan did not promptly report all identified or recovered overpayments nor provide prompt notification of changes in member’s and network provider’s 
circumstances within ten-working -days to 
DHCS.  
 1. Revised policies and 
procedures to align with timely notification of all identified or recovered overpayments, changes in provider circumstance, and changes in member circumstance to DHCS  1a. Identifying  
Investigating and Reporting Fraud Wast and Abuse Policy and Procedure 1b.10.3.19_Chan ges in  Member’s Circumstances That May Affect Their Eligibility 1c. CR105  
Ongoing Monitoring and  
Interventions  
 1a. 08/21/2023  
1b. 04/19/2023  
1c. 09/06/2023  
 The following documentation supports the MCP’s efforts to correct this 
finding:  
 POLI CIES AND PROCEDURES  
 • Updated P&P, “ Identifying, Investigating and Reporting Fraud, Waste and 
Abuse” (08/21/23) to state  that in the event the MCP identifies or recovers 
an overpayment to a Provider due to potential fraud, the MCP must notify its Managed Care Operations Division (MCOD) Contr act Manager (CM) 
and the DHCS Audits and Investigation Intake Unit within 10 days of identifying the overpayment, regardless of the amount. ( 2.3.1 Identifying 
Investigating and Reporting Fraud Waste and Abuse). 
 • Updated P&P, “Ongoing Monitoring and Interventions” (09/06/23) to state that the MCP’s Credentialing Department will promptly report to the 
MCP’s Compliance Department all changes in a provider’s circumstances within five working days to be submitted to DH CS within ten working days. 
(2.3.3 CR105 Ongoing Monitoring and Interventions ). 
 TRAINING  
 
• Meeting Agenda and Meeting Notes, “All Investigators Monthly Team Meeting”  (04/26/23) and “DHCS Timely Notification Provider Change in 
Circumstance”  (09/06/23)  as evidence that the MCP conducted training to 
staff on the requirement to promptly report all identified or recovered overpayments  and provide prompt notification of changes in member’s 
and network provider’s circumstances  within ten -working -days to DHCS . 
(2.4.1 Overpayment Reporting  Meeting Agenda 042623 , 2.4.3 DHCS 
 - 3 -  
Finding Number and 
Summary   
Action Taken  
Supporting 
Documentation Implementation  
Date*  
(*Short -Term, Long- Term)   
DHCS Comments  
Timely Notification Provider Change in Circumstance ). 
 MONITORING AND OVERSIGHT  
 • Excel Spreadsheet, “Regulatory Reporting Tracking” as evidence that the 
MCP has a monitoring process to track the notification of changes in member’s and network provider’s circumstances within ten- working -days 
to DHCS. The Regulatory Reporting Tracking spreadsheet tracks the following categories: Internal Due Date Requirement, Internal Due Date, Internal Submission Status, Regulatory Submission Due Date, Regulatory Due Date, Regulatory Submission Status, Regulatory Submission Date. (3.1.1f Regulatory Repor ting Tracking). 
 • Excel Spreadsheet, “Overpayment Report” as evidence that the MCP has a monitoring process to track all identified or recovered overpayments within 10 working days to DHCS. On a weekly basis, the MCP will extract 
weekly overpayment reports based on the I nitial Demand Letter  Sent Date 
and Demand MC 609 Sent  Date related to the Medi -Cal line of business 
to confirm the overpayment s are reported within 10 working days.  
(Overpayment Report 10232023).  
 The corrective action plan for finding 6.2.1 is accepted.  
   
   
 
  
 - 4 -  
  Submitted by Plan :  Blue Shield Promise Health Care Plan                                                                          Date:    September 7, 2023 
 Title:   Kristen Cerf  [Signature on file]  
Promise President & CEO     
     
