1 
DHCS AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRA CT AND ENROLLM ENT REVIEW DIVISION 
REPORT ON TH E FOCUSED AU DIT OF BLUE 
SHIELD O F CA LIFORNIA P ROMISE H EALTH P LAN 
2023 
Contract N umber: 0 9-86153 
Audit Period: April 1, 2 022 – March 31, 2023 
Dates of Audit: A pril 17, 2023 – April 28, 2023 
Report Issued: August 30, 2024
2 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................. 3  
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ...................................................................................... 5 
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES ........................................................................... 6 
IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS Performance Area: Transportation ............................................................ 7  
Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 
  
3 
I. INTRODUCTION
Background 
In ac cordance w ith Ca lifornia Welfare an d Institutions Code  section 14456, th e 
Department of He alth Car e Services (DHCS) m ay conduct additional r eview s outside o f 
the an nual m edical au dit when D HCS de termines there i s good cause.  
DHCS di rected the Co ntract an d Enrollmen t Review D ivision to c onduct focused audits 
of all contracting M edi-C al Managed Care Pl ans (Plans) to e valuate th e current Plans’ 
performance i n the areas of B ehavioral Health an d Transportation s ervices. 
These focused audi ts differ f rom D HCS’ regular an nual m edical au dits in sc ope an d 
depth. Th e annual m edical au dits evaluate t he Pl an’s organizational str uctures, p olicies 
and pro cedures, a nd systems fo r compliance with c ontractual req uirements. T he focused 
audits examined the operational i ssues that m ay hinder ap propriate an d timely member 
access to medically necessary care. Th e focused audi t engagement formall y commenced 
in January 2023 through D ecember 20 23.           
For th e Behavioral Health se ction, the f ocused audit evaluated the Plan’s monitoring 
activities of specific ar eas such as Specialty M ental Health S ervices (S MHS), Non -
Specialty Mental Health S ervices (NSMHS), an d Substance U se Disorder S ervices (SUDS). 
The f ocused audit also r eviewed potential i ssues that may contribute to th e lack o f 
member access a nd ov ersight f or SMHS, N SMHS, a nd SU DS. 
The f ocused audit conducted a more i n-depth l ook at current Plan operations/practices 
for executing the d elivery o f transportation se rvices. Th e audit examined potential 
causes for t he syst emic i ssues surrounding the Non-E mergency Medical Tr ansportation 
(NEMT) a nd N on-M edical Tr ansportation ( NMT) services, specifically w hen 
transportation i s delegate d to a transportation b roker.  
Blue S hield of Cal ifornia Promise Health Pl an (Plan) i s a Health M aintenance 
Organization, w holly owned and o perated by Blue S hield of Cal ifornia. Th e Plan provides 
Medi -Cal Managed Care s ervices in S an Diego Co unty. B lue S hield of Cal ifornia is an 
indepen dent me mber of t he Blue Shi eld As sociation.  
Formerly k nown a s Care 1st Health P lan, I nc., th e Plan has maintained a California full -
service he alth plan license und er the Kn ox-Keene A ct since 1995. I n June 2005, DHCS 
granted the G eographic M anaged Care c ontract to th e Plan to p rovide h ealth c are 
service s to M edi-Cal beneficia ries in San Diego County.  
In 2015, B lue S hield of Cal iforni a acquired Care 1st Health P lan. E ffective J anuary 1, 2 019, 
the Pl an’s name w as changed to Blue  Shield of Cal ifornia Promise  Health Pl an. 
4 
 
 During the audit period, the Plan delegated behavioral health services to Carelon Behavioral Health (Carelon) (formerly known as Beacon Health Options). The Plan delegated transportation services to Call -the-Car, Inc. (CTC), a transportation broker.  
As of March 2023, the Plan served 148,048 members through the Medi -Cal line of 
business.   
5 
 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 This report presents the findings of the DHCS focused audit for the period of April 1, 2022, through March 31, 2023. The audit was conducted on April 17, 2023, through April 28, 2023. The audit consisted of document review, surveys, verification studies, interviews, and file reviews with the Plan representatives.  
An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on June 25, 2024. The Plan was allowed 15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information and documentation addressing the draft audit report findings. The Plan submitted a response after the Exit Conference. The results of the evaluation of the Plan’s response are reflected in this report.  
The focused audit evaluated the areas of performance for Behavioral Health and Transportation services.  
The summary of findings by performance area follows:  
Performance Area: Behavioral Health 
Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care : 
• Specialty Mental Health Services  
• Non-Specialty Mental Health Services  
• Substance Use Disorder Services  Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
There were no findings noted for this category for the audit period.  
Performance Area: Transportation  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
• Non-Emergency Medical Transportation  
• Non-Medical Transportation  
The Plan is required to provide NEMT services when the member's medical and physical condition is such that transport by ordinary means of public or private conveyance is medically contraindicated and transportation is required for the purpose of obtaining needed medical care. The Plan did not ensure the delegate, Call -the-Car, provided the 
appropriate level of service for members requiring ambulatory door-to -door service.  
  
6 
 
III. SCOPE/ AUDIT PROCEDURES  
 
SCOPE  
This focused audit was conducted by the DHCS, Contract and Enrollment Review Division to ascertain the medical services provided to Plan members complied with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and the State Contract.  
PROCEDURE  
On November 3, 2022, DHCS informed Plans that it would conduct focused audits to assess performance in certain identified high -risk areas. The focused audit was 
concurrently scheduled with the annual medical audit. The audit scope encompassed the following  sections of review:  
• Behavioral Health – SMHS, NSMHS, and SUDS 
• Transportation – NEMT and NMT services  
The audit was conducted from April 17, 2023, through April 28, 2023. The audit included a review of the Plan’s policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement the policies, and verification studies of the implementation and effectiveness of the 
policies. Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted with Plan administrators and staff.  
The following verification studies were conducted:  
Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care  
SMHS: Five samples were reviewed to evaluate care coordination with the County MHP, as well as compliance with All Plan Letter (APL) requirements.  NSMHS: Five samples were reviewed to evaluate compliance with APL requirements.  SUDS: Two samples were reviewed to evaluate compliance with APL requirements.  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
NEMT: Five samples were reviewed to evaluate compliance with APL requirements.  NMT: Five samples were reviewed to evaluate compliance with APL requirements.  
A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report.   
7 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
Performance Area: Transportation – NEMT and NMT  
Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
 
3.1 NEMT―Ambulatory Door -to-Door  
The Plan must provide NEMT services when the member's medical and physical condition is such that transport by ordinary means of public or private conveyance is medically contraindicated and transportation is required for the purpose of obtaining needed me dical care. 
The Plan or its transportation brokers must arrange or provide the modality of transportation prescribed in the Physician Certification Statement (PCS) form and cannot triage the member’s need to assess for the most appropriate level of NEMT service. The Plan is required to provide NEMT for members who cannot reasonably ambulate or are unable to stand or walk without assistance, including those using a walker or crutches. Transportation brokers cannot downgrade the member’s level of care from NEMT to NMT, i ncluding ambulatory door -to-door services. ( APL 22 -008 Non -Emergency Medical 
and Non-Medical Transportation Services and Related Travel Expenses ) 
Plan policy, 10.31.1 NEMT and NMT Services and Related Travel Expenses  (revised August 
2022), states the Plan will authorize the appropriate modality prescribed by the provider on the PCS form. The Plan or its transportation broker shall not modify an NEMT authorization or change the modality outlined in the PCS form or downgrade the members’ level of transportation from NEMT to NMT once the treating physician prescribes the form of transportation on the Request for NEMT. If multiple modalities are selected  in the PCS form, the Plan will authorize the lowest cost type of NEMT that is 
adequate for the member’s needs. Upon a member’s request, the Plan or its transportation broker will allow ambulatory members to utilize NMT services for a particular ride(s) if  NEMT services are not needed. NMT may be scheduled for members 
currently using a wheelchair if the member is able to ambulate without assistance from the driver. The Plan providers NEMT for members who cannot reasonably ambulate or are unable to stand or walk without assistance, including those using a walker or 
crutches.  
8 
 
Amendment 4 to Amended and Restated Exhibit A-2 Statement of Work  (signed February 
16, 2023), includes ambulatory, door -to-door as a transportation service type for NMT 
services. “Ambulatory door -to-door” means the driver will physically assist the member 
from the pickup location, which may include the front door of the  member’s residence, 
to the vehicle, and from the vehicle to the front door of their place of service.  Unless forbidden, by the facility, if requested by the member, the driver will accompany the member into the facility to the appointment location. On a return trip, the driver will physically assist the member from the place of service to the vehicle, and from the vehicle to the front door of their place of residence. If allowed by the facility and if requested by the member, driver will pick up the member inside the facility.  
Finding: The Plan did not ensure its delegate, Call the -Car, provided the appropriate 
level of service for members requiring ambulatory door- to-door service.  
A verification study of five NMT samples revealed there were five NMT trips scheduled as ambulatory door -to-door. Two trips were completed, two trips were cancelled, and 
one trip was missed.  The Plan’s transportation universe included 109,747 NMT trips of which 14,465 trips were ambulatory door -to-door.  
APL 22 -008 prohibits Plan’s from downgrading ambulatory door -to-door NEMT services 
to NMT; The Plan is required to provide NEMT to members needing ambulatory assistance. The Plan incorrectly allows for its delegate to schedule ambulatory door -to-
door services as NMT.  
When the delegate does not provide the required NEMT modality for door -to-door 
assistance, members may not receive the appropriate level of care, which may result in adverse impacts on member health.  
Recommendation: Revise and implement policies and procedures to ensure its 
delegate provides the appropriate NEMT modality for members requiring ambulatory door -to-door assistance . 
