       
CONTRACT AND  ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION  
SAN DIEGO  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
BLUE SHIELD OF CALIFORNIA 
PROMISE HEALTH PLAN  
 
2023  
 
Contract Number:  
  
09-86153  
 
Audit Period:  
   
Date of Audit:     
Report Issued:  
 April 1, 2022  
    Through 
March 31, 2023  
 
April 17, 2023  
   Through  
April 27, 2023  August 3, 2023  
 
   
    
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. 1 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  .................................................................  2 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  ...................................................... 4 
 IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity  ............... 6 
 
 
 1 of 6 I. INTRODUCTION  
  Blue Shield of California Promise Health Plan (Plan) is a Health Maintenance Organization wholly owned and operated by Blue Shield of California. The Plan 
provides Medi -Cal Managed Care services in San Diego County. Blue Shield of 
California is an independent member of the Blue Shield Association.   Formerly known as Care 1
st Health Plan, Inc., the Plan has maintained a California full -
service health plan license under the Knox -Keene Act since 1995. In June 2005, the 
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS ) granted the Geographic Managed Care 
contract to the Plan to provide health care services to Medi -Cal beneficiaries in San 
Diego County.  
 In 2015, Blue Shield of California acquired Care 1
st Health Plan. Effective January 1, 
2019, the Plan’s name was changed to Blue Shield of California Promise Health Plan.  
 As of March 2023, the Plan served 148,048 members  through its Medi -Cal line of 
business.  
    
 
 2 of 6 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 This report presents the findings of the DHCS medical audit of the Plan for the period of 
April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023. The audit was conducted from April 17, 2023 through April 27, 2023. The audi t consisted of document review, verification studies, 
and interviews with Plan personnel.   The audit evaluated six categories of performa nce: Utilization Management  (UM) , Case 
Management and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Member ’s 
Rights, Quality Management , and Administrative and Organizational Capacity . 
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on July 13, 2023. The Plan was allowed 15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing the draft audit report findings. The Plan submitted a response after the E xit 
Conference. The results of the evaluation of the Plan’s response are reflected in this report.  
 DHCS issued a Corrective Action Plan (CAP) for the 2022 DHCS medical audit. The Plan was required to respond to audit findings through the CAP and identify steps to resolve compliance issues. During the 2023 medical audit process, DHCS reviewed the 
CAP while it remained open through March 3, 2023. T he audit found that the Plan 
implement ed eight  of the 13 recommendations  thus far .  
 The Plan continuously remediated compliance issues during the CAP process. The 2023 audit found that the Plan made improvements in its processes.  This was primarily 
attributed to the onboarding of the Plan’ s new Senior Medical Director  in January 2023. 
The Plan designated the Senior Medical Director to actively participate in and oversee 
its UM, grievance, and appeal  processes . The verification study results  demonstrated 
the Plan’s efforts with the direct participation and oversight by the new Senior Medical Director.  
 The section below presents a summary of the  current  finding:  
 Category 1 –  Utilization Management  
 Audit of Category 1 yielded no findings.  
 Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 Audit of Category 2 yielded no findings.  
 Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
 Audit of Category 3 yielded no findings.   Category 4 –  Member’s Rights  
 
 3 of 6  Audit of Category 4 yielded no findings.   Category 5 –  Quality Management  
 Audit of Category 5 yielded no findings.   Category 6 –  Administrative and Organizational Capacity 
 The Plan is required to promptly report, wit hin ten- working -days to DHCS,  all 
overpayments due to potential fraud; when the Plan receives information about changes 
in a member’s circumstances  and when the Plan receives information about a change in 
a network provider's circumstances . The Plan did not promptly report all potential fraud 
overpayments nor changes in member’s and network prov ider’s circumstances within 
ten-working -days to DHCS.  
                               
 
 4 of 6 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  
  SCOPE  
 This audit was conducted by DHCS, Contract and Enrollment Review Division  to 
ascertain that the medical services provided to Plan members comply with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regul ations and guidelines, and the s tate Contract.  
 PROCEDURE  
 The review was conducted fr om April 17, 2023 through April 27, 2023. The audit 
included a review of the Plan’s policies for providing services, the procedures used to 
implement the policies, and verification studies of the implementation and effectiveness of those policies. Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted with Plan administrators and staff.   
 The following verification studies were conducted:  
 Category 1 –  Utilization Management  
 Prior Authorization (PA)  Requests : 26 (nine approved and 17 denied)  medical  requests  
were reviewed for timeliness, consiste nt application of criteria, appropriate review , and 
communication of results to members and providers .  
 Appeal P rocedures: 16 PA appeals and 19 expedited PA appeals  were reviewed for 
appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 Initial Health Appointment (IHA) : Ten medical records were reviewed for provision, 
completeness, and timeliness of IHAs.  
 Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
 Non-Emergency Medical Transportation ( NEMT ) and N on-Medical Transportation 
(NMT): 15 NEMT  and 15 NMT records  were reviewed to confirm compliance with the 
transportation and appropriateness of services provided.  
 Category 4 –  Member’s Rights  
 Grievance P rocedures: 29 Quality of C are (QOC)  and 20 Quality of S ervice  (QOS) 
standard grievances , 24 expedited grievances  (14 QOC and ten QOS), ten exempt 
grievances, and ten call inquiries were reviewed. All grievances were reviewed for 
timely resolution, appropriate classification, response to the complainant, submission to 
the appropriate level for review, and translation into the member’s preferred language (if 
 
 5 of 6 applicable).  
 Confidentiality Rights: 14 security  incidents were reviewed for processing and r eporting 
requirements.  
 Category 5 –  Quality Management  
 Provider Qualifications : 20 new provider training record s were  reviewed for timeliness  of 
Medi -Cal Managed Care program training.  
 Category 6 –  Administrative and Organizational Capacity 
 Fraud and Abuse: Ten  fraud and abuse cases were reviewed for processing and 
reporting requirements.  
 Encounter Data: Five encounter data records were reviewed for complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely encounter data submissions.   
 A description of the finding is c ontained in the following section.
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN: Blue Shield of California Promise Health Plan  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023  
DATE OF AUDIT: April 17, 2023 through April 27 , 2023 
 
 
 6 of 6  
CATEGORY 6  – ADMINISTRATIVE AND ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY 
 
 
6.2  
Fraud and Abuse  
 6.2.1 Timely Notification 
 The Plan is required to promptly report, within ten- working -days to DHCS of all 
overpayments due to potential fraud, and changes in a member’s and provider’s 
circumstances . 
(Contract Amendment A32, Exhibit E, Attachment 2, Provision 26, Subprovision B)   
 Finding:  The Plan did  not promptly report all identified or recovered overpayments nor 
provide prompt notification of changes in member’s and network prov ider’s 
circumstances within ten- working -days to DHCS.  
 The Plan’s policy, Overpayment Recoupment Process  (revised December 2021) , stated 
that the Plan would report to DHCS annually on recoveries of overpayments, including 
those made to a network provider that was otherwise excluded from participation in the Medicaid program and those made to a network provider due to fraud, waste, or abuse.   
 A review of the Plan’s DHCS submission logs and correspondence found that the Plan 
reported two recovered overpayments within 30 and 44 days of receiving issued checks. Further, the Plan not ified DHCS of changes in member s’ circum stances on a 
monthly basis  and network provider’s circumstances on a quarterly basis.  
 The Plan stated in an interview that it reports  to or notifies DHCS within ten -working -
days, in accordance with the amended contract, and that the requirements are included in its policy. However, t he Pl an was unaware that its policy did not include the reporting 
requirement within ten -working -days to DHCS and therefore did not have a monitoring 
mechanism in place.  Following the interview , the Plan drafted an update to its policy to 
include those requirements.  
 If the Plan does not promptly report all overpayments and changes in member’s and network provider’s circumstances to DHCS, it may compromise the integrity of the Plan and the Medi -Cal program.  
 Recommendation:  Revise and i mplement policies and procedures to ensure the 
reporting of all overpayments and the prompt not ification of changes in member  and 
network prov ider’s circumstances within ten- working -days to DHCS.  
       
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION  
SAN DIEGO  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
BLUE SHIELD OF CALIFORNIA  
PROMISE HEALTH PLAN  
 
2023  
 
Contract Number:   
  
09-86154 and 22-20483 
State Supported Services  
Audit Period:  
   
Date of Audit:     
Report Issued:  
 April 1, 2022  
    Through 
March 31, 2023  
 
April 17, 2023    Through April 27, 2023 
 
August 3, 2023  
 
   
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. 1 
 Il. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ................................................... 2 
   
 1 of 2 I. INTRODUCTION  
 This report presents the audit findings of Blue Shield of California Promise Health Plan (Plan) State Supported Services Contract Nos. 09- 86154 and 22- 20483. The State 
Support ed Services C ontract s cover abortion services for  the Plan.  
 The review was conducted from April 17 , 2023  through April 27, 20 23 for the audit period 
of April 1, 202 2 through March 31 , 2023 . The audit consisted of a document review, 
verification study,  and interviews with Plan staff.   
 The audit reviewed 16  service claims for appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on June 20, 2023. The Plan was allowed 15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing the draft audit report findings. The Plan submitted a response after the Exit Conference. The results of the evaluation of the Plan’s response are reflected i n this 
report.
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN: Blue Shield of California Promise Health Plan  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DATE OF AUDIT: April 17, 2023 through April  27, 202 3 
 
 2 of 2 STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES  
 The Plan is required to provide, or arrange to provide, to eligible members the following 
State Suppor ted Services: Current Procedural Terminology codes 59840 through 59857 
and Health Care Financing Administration Common Procedure Coding System codes X1516, X1518, X7724, X7726, and Z0336.  (State Suppor ted Services Contract s, Exhibit A)  
 The Plan policy 10.2.35, Abortion Services  (revised January 2023) , stated that 
members could access abortion services in or out -of-network without prior authorization. 
The Plan defines abortion services as a “sensitive service” and assures confidentiality and accessibility are maintained. Inpatient hospital ization for the performance of an 
abortion requires prior authorization under the same criteri a as other medical 
procedures.  Minors who wish to receive abortion services may do so without parental 
consent under the Medi -Cal Minor Consent Program.  
 The Member Handbook/Evidence of Coverage informs members that some providers have a moral objection to abortion and have a right not to offer this service. However, 
members can contact the Plan’s Member Services Call Center for assistance with 
abortion services. M embers are also informed that referral s are not needed from the 
primary care provider for abortion and abortion- related services.  
 The Provider Manual informs providers of the members’ freedom of choice in obtaining sensitive services, such as abortion ser vices, without prior authorization.  
 The audi t found no exceptions to the contractual requirements .  
 Recommendation: None  
