 
  
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIE W DIVISION 
RANCHO CUCAMONGA  
 
 
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
 CALIFORNIA HEALTH AND WELLNESS  
 
2023 
 
Contract Number:  
  
13-90157 and 13-90161      
 
Audit Period: 
 
 
 
Dates of Audit: 
 
 
 
Report Issued: 
 July 1, 2022      
    Through 
June 30, 2023      
 
July 17, 2023      
    Through 
July 28, 2023      
 
November 13, 2023       
 
 
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ .............1 
 
II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ .2 
 
III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  ................................ ......................4 
 
IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 Category 1 – Utilization Management ................................ ..............6 
Category 4 – Member’s Rights ................................ ........................8 
 
  
  
 
 
 
1 of 9 I. INTRODUCTION  
 
 
The California Legislature awarded California Health and Wellness  (Plan) a contract by 
the California Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) to provide Medi -Cal services 
in 19 counties as of September 23, 2023. The Plan is a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Centene Corporation, a publicly traded company that serves as a major intermediary for 
both government -sponsored and privately insured health care programs.   
 
This Contract was implemented under the State’s Medi -Cal Managed Care Rural 
Expansion program. The ex pansion program included members eligible for Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families and Children’s Health Insurance program.  
 
The Plan’s provider network includes independent providers practicing as individuals, 
small and large group practices, and comm unity clinics. The Plan’s provider network 
includes independent providers comprised of primary care physicians ( 479) and 
specialists (3,669) as well as hospitals ( 27) and ancillary providers ( 257).  
 
As of June 30, 2023, the Plan served 2 73,136 Medi-Cal members in the following 
counties: Alpine (81), Amador (2,095), Butte (54,672), Calaveras (6,427), Colusa 
(4,867), El Dorado (21,694), Glenn (10,297), Imperial (83,216), Inyo (2,423), Mariposa 
(1,310), Mono (1,165), Nevada (11,334), Placer (16,411), Plumas (3,045), Sierra (348), 
Sutter (16,021), Tehama (17,188), Tuolumne (6,997), and Yuba (13,545). 
 
  
 
2 of 9 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
 
 
This report presents the audit findings of the DHCS medical audit for the period  July 1, 
2022 through June 30, 202 3. The audit was conducted from July 17, 2023 through July 
28, 2023. The audit consisted of document reviews, verification studies, and interviews 
with Plan representatives and a delegate entity.    
 
An Exit Conference was held on October 16, 2023. The Plan was allowed 15 calendar 
days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information to 
address the preliminary audit findings. On October 31, 2023,  the Plan submitted a 
response to address the audit findings. The res ults of the DHCS evaluation of the Plan’s 
response are reflected in this report.   
 
The audit evaluated six categories of performance: Utilization Management, Case 
Management and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Member’s 
Rights, Quality Management, and Administrative and Organizational Capacity.  
 
The prior DHCS medical audit report issued on February 8, 2023, for the audit period of 
May 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022, identified deficiencies incorporated into the 
Corrective Action Plan (CAP ). The prior year CAP was not completely closed at the time 
of the audit. The Plan is working with the Managed Care Quality and Monitoring Division 
to correct the deficiencies in the CAP. 
 
The summary of findings by category follows: 
 
Category 1 – Utilization Management  
 
The Plan is required to implement and maintain procedures to allow members to file a 
grievance when they disagree with the Plan’s decision for an expedited appeal.  The 
Plan did not inform members of their right to file a grievance after denial of a request for 
an expedited resolution of an appeal.  
 
Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 
Review of the Plan’s Case Management and Coordination of Care yielded no findings.  
 
Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care 
 
Review of the Plan’s Access and Availability of Care yielded no findings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 of 9 Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 
The Plan is required to immediately submit  medical Quality of Care (QOC) grievances 
to the Plan’s Medical Director for action.  The Plan did not immediately submit  QOC 
grievances to the Plan’s Medical Director  for action. 
 
Category 5 – Quality Management  
 
Review of the Plan’s quality improvement s ystem yielded no findings.   
 
Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity  
 
Review of the Plan’s organizational capacity to guard against fraud and abuse yielded 
no findings. 
 
  
 
4 of 9 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  
 
 
SCOPE 
 
The DHCS, Contract and Enrollment Review Division  conducted this audit to ascertain  
that medical services provided to Plan members complied with federal and state laws, 
Medi-Cal regulations and guidelines, and the state County Organized Health Systems 
contract. 
 
PROCEDURE 
 
The audit period was Ju ly 1, 2022 through June 30, 2023. The audit was conducted 
from July 17, 2023 through July 28, 2023. The audit included a review of the Plan's 
policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement the policies, and 
verification studies to determine that policies were implemented and  effective. 
Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted with Plan representatives 
and a delegated network provider.  
 
The following verification studies were conducted:  
 
Category 1 – Utilization Management   
 
Prior Authorization  (PA) Requests: 22 medical (12 standard and ten urgent), 19 
pharmacy, 11 dental anesthesia, and seven applied behavior analysis PA requests 
were reviewed for timeliness, consistent application of criteria, appropriateness of 
review, and communication of results to members and providers. 
 
Appeal Process : Six Seniors and Persons with Disabilities  and 20 non-Seniors and 
Persons with Disabilities  PA appeals were reviewed for appropriate and timely 
adjudication.  
 
Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care  
 
California Children’s Services (CC S): 20 medical records were reviewed for appropriate 
CCS identification, referral to the CCS program, and coordination of care for non -eligible 
CCS conditions.  
 
Behavioral Health Treatment : 12 new member medical records were reviewed for 
compliance with behavio ral health treatment requirements  and 11 medical records were 
reviewed for continuity of care for established behavioral health treatment patients.  
 
Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 
Emergency Service and Family Planning Claims: 22 emergency service claims and 21 
 
5 of 9 family planning claims were reviewed for appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 
Non-Emergency Medical Transportation: Ten records were reviewed to confirm 
compliance with Non-Emergency Medical Transportation requirements. 
 
Non-Medical Transportation: Ten records were reviewed to confirm compliance with 
Non-Medical Transportation  requirements. 
 
Category 4 – Member’s Rights 
 
Grievance Procedures: Ten standard Quality of Service (QOS), ten Seniors and 
Persons with Disabilities QOS, 21 standard  QOC, and five Seniors and Persons with 
Disabilities QOC grievance cases were reviewed for timely resolution, appropriate 
response to complainant, and submission to the appropriate level  for review. 20 inquiry 
calls were reviewed for proper classification and routing to the appropriate level for 
review.  
 
Category 5 – Quality Management  
 
Quality Improvement System : 18 potential quality issue cases were reviewed for timely 
evaluation and effective action taken  to address improvements. 
 
Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity  
 
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse: Ten fraud and abuse cases were reviewed for proper 
reporting of suspected fraud, waste, or abuse to DHCS within the required timeframe.  
 
A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report.  
 
 
 
 
❖ COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ❖ 
 
PLAN: California Health and Wellness  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: July 1, 2022, through June 30, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: July 17, 2023, through July 28, 2023 
 
6 of 9  
CATEGORY 1 - UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT  
  
1.1  
UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM  
REFERRAL TRACKING SYSTEM  
 
1.3.1 Members’ Right to File a Grievance  
 
The Plan shall implement and maintain procedures to allow members to file a grievance when 
they disagree with the Plan’s decision to extend the timeframe for resolution of an appeal or 
an expedited appeal.  (Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 14(2))  
 
If the Plan denies a request for  an expedited resolution of an appeal, it must follow the 
requirements in Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 42, section 438.408(c)(2). (CFR, 
Title 42, section 438.410(c)(2))  
 
If the Plan extends the timeframe of an appeal, it must give the member written notice of the 
reason for that decision and inform the member of their right to file a grievance if they 
disagree. (CFR, Title 42, section 438.408(c)(2)(ii))  
 
The Member Handboo k must contain information that enables members to effectively use the 
managed care program. This includes grievance, appeal, fair hearing requirements, 
procedures, and timeframes. The right to file grievances and appeals must be included. (CFR, 
Title 42, section 438.10(g)(2)(xi)(A) and (B))  
 
Plan policy CA.QI.11, Member Appeals and Grievances System Description (approved  
6/9/2022), states the Plan will maintain an expedited review process that at any time, for 
appeals when the members request or the provider indicates that the service involves an  
imminent and serious threat to the health of the member, including,  but not limited to, severe  
pain, potential loss of life, limb, or major bodily function.   
 
Finding: The Plan did not inform members of their right to file a grievance after denial of a 
request for an expedited resolution of an appeal.   
 
The verification study revealed that 4 out of 26 appeals were requests for an expedited 
resolution. The Plan denied all four requests without informing members of their right to file a 
grievance if they disagreed with the decision.   
 
The Plan’s policies lacked procedures to inform members of their right to file a grievance after 
denial of a request for  an expedited resolution of an appeal. The Plan’s written notices must 
include the reason for the decision and inform members of their right to fil e a grievance if they 
disagree. However, the Plan’s written notices did not inform members of their right to file a 
 
❖ COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ❖ 
 
PLAN: California Health and Wellness  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: July 1, 2022, through June 30, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: July 17, 2023, through July 28, 2023 
 
7 of 9 grievance if they disagreed with the Plan’s decision.  
 
The Member Handbook also did not contain information to advise members of their righ t to file 
a grievance if the Plan denied their request for an expedited resolution of an appeal.  
 
During the interview, the Plan stated that the Contract is reviewed annually; however, the Plan 
was unaware of the requirement to inform members of their righ t to file a grievance after 
denial of a request for  an expedited resolution of an appeal. Therefore, the Plan did not have 
an effective process to ensure members were informed of their right to file a grievance after 
denial for an expedited resolution of an appeal . 
 
When members are not fully advised of their rights, they cannot make well -informed decisions 
about their healthcare. This could potentially cause a delay in receiving necessary care, and 
potentially result in patient harm.   
 
Recommendation: Revise and implement policies, procedures, the Member Handbook , and 
informing templates to ensure members are informed of their right to file a grievance after 
denial of a request for  an expedited resolution of an appeal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
❖ COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ❖ 
 
PLAN: California Health and Wellness  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: July 1, 2022, through June 30, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: July 17, 2023, through July 28, 2023 
 
8 of 9  
CATEGORY 4 – MEMBER’S RIGHTS  
 
 
4.1  
GRIEVANCE SYSTEM  
 
4.1.1 Quality of Care Grievances  
 
Grievances related to medical QOC issues shall be referred to the Plan’s Medical Director. 
(Contract, Exhibit A, Attachment 14 (2)(D))  
 
Grievances related to medical QOC issues must be immediately submitted to the Plan’s 
Medical Director for action. The Plan must ensure the person making the final decision for the 
proposed resolution of a grievance is a health care  professional with clinical expertis e in 
treating a member’s condition or disease on any grievance involving clinical issues. (All Plan 
Letter 21-011, Grievance and Appeal Requirements, Notice and “Your Rights” Templates)  
 
Plan policy CA.QI.11, Member Appeals and Grievances System Descriptio n (approved 
6/9/2022), states the content and substance of a grievance, including all clinical care aspects, 
will be fully investigated, and documented according to applicable statutory, regulatory, and 
contractual provisions. All QOC grievances will be le veled for severity by a Medical Director. 
Additionally, the Plan will ensure that decision makers on grievances are health care 
professionals with clinical expertise in treating the member’s condition when deciding 
grievances involving clinical issues.  
 
Finding: The Plan did not ensure QOC grievances were immediately submitted to the Plan’s 
Medical Director for action.  
 
The verification study revealed 26 out of 26 QOC grievances were not immediately reviewed 
by the Medical Director. The following are exam ples of the deficiencies:  
 
• On September 6, 2022 , a member who was experiencing  nausea, filed a QOC 
grievance against a provider who refused to lower medication dosage. The case was 
initially reviewed by a Registered Nurse (RN) and subsequently referred to the Medical 
Director on September 29, 2022 . It took 23 days from the time of the grievance receipt 
date until the Medical Director referral date. This case was de -escalated from an 
expedited grievance to a standard grievance by the RN prior to the Medical Director’s 
review.  
 
• On October 24, 2022 , a member having difficulty obtaining approval for the medication 
to complete chemotherapy filed a grievance against a provider. The case was initially 
reviewed by an RN and subsequently referred to the Medical Director on  
 
❖ COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ❖ 
 
PLAN: California Health and Wellness  
 
AUDIT PERIOD: July 1, 2022, through June 30, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: July 17, 2023, through July 28, 2023 
 
9 of 9 November 17, 2022 . It took 24 days from the time of the grievance receipt date until the 
Medical Director referral date. This case was de -escalated from an expedited grievance 
to a standard grievance by the RN prior to the MD’s review.  
 
• On March 4, 2023, a member with presumed pseudo tu mor cerebri filed a QOC 
grievance. The case was initially reviewed by an RN and subsequently referred to the 
MD on March 24, 2023. It took 20 days from the time of the grievance receipt date until 
the Medical Director referral date. This case was de -escalated from an expedited 
grievance to a standard grievance  by the RN prior to the Medical Director’s review .  
 
According to the Plan’s grievance process flow chart, when a member files a grievance, the  
Appeals and Grievances T riage Team reviews, classifies, and documents receipt of the 
grievance in the Plan’s electronic record keeping system. The grievance is then assigned to 
an Appeals and Grievances Case Coordinator for research and submitted  to a Medical 
Director for review and resolution. However, the Plan’s flow chart did not include a 
documented step for the immediate review by a Medical Director.   
 
Although Plan policy CA.QI.11 stated that clinical care grievances will be fully documented 
according to contractual provisions, the Plan’s policy and their grievance process flow chart 
did not include steps for the immediate submission of QOC grievances to their Medical 
Director for action.  
 
During the interview, the Plan stated that their Medical Director determines the severity of 
QOC cases within 30 days. However, the Plan could not substantiate that the Medical Director 
was immediately involved in the review process. Therefore, t he Plan did not have an adequate 
process in place to ensure QOC grievances were immediately reviewed by their Medical 
Director. 
 
Lack of the Medical Director’s immediate action and involvement in QOC grievances could 
result in substandard care by providers  and potentially cause medical harm to members.  
 
Recommendation:  Revise and implement policies and procedures  to ensure QOC 
grievances are immediately submitted to the Plan’s Medical Director for action.   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW  DIVISION 
RANCHO CUCAMONGA  
 
 
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
CALIFORNIA  HEALTH AND WELLNESS   
 
2023 
 
Contract Number:  
  
13-90158 and 13-90162 
State Supported Services  
 
Audit Period: 
 
 
 
Dates of Audit: 
 
 
 
Report Issued: 
 July 1, 2022 
    Through 
June 30, 2023 
 
July 17, 2023 
    Through 
July 28, 2023 
 
November 13, 2023  
 
 
  
 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ .............1 
 
Il. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  ................................ ...................2 
 
 
 
1 of 2 I. INTRODUCTION  
 
 
This report presents the audit results of California Health and Wellness  (Plan) compliance 
and implementation of the State Supported Services contract with the State of California. 
The Contract covers abortion services for the Plan.   
 
The audit covered the audit period from July 1, 2022 through June 30, 202 3. The audit 
was conducted from July 17, 2023 through July 28, 2023. The audit consisted of document 
reviews, verification study, and interviews with Plan  staff.  
 
An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on October 16, 2023 . There were no 
deficiencies identified for the audit of the Plan’s State Supported Services.   
 
 
 
  
 
❖ COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ❖ 
 
PLAN: California Health and Wellness   
 
AUDIT PERIOD: July 1, 2022, through June 30, 2023 
DATES OF AUDIT: July 17, 2023, through July 28, 2023 
 
2 of 2  
STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES  
 
The Plan is required to provide, or arrange to provide, to eligible members the following 
State Supported Services: Current Procedural Terminology Codes 59840 through 
59857 and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Common Procedure 
Coding System Codes: X1516, X1518, X7724, X7726, and Z0336. These codes are 
subject to change upon the Department of Health Care Service ’s implementation of the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 electronic transaction and 
code sets provisions. (State Supported Services Contract, Exhibit A, ( 1))  
 
Plan Policy and Procedure, CA.CLMS.SS.01, California Health and Wellness Sensitive 
Services (Revised 06/04/21) , described the process by which Medi -Cal members may 
access and obtain abortion services. The policy stated that abortion services and 
supplies are covered by the Plan. The Plan provides members timely access to abortion 
services from any qualified provider, or non -contracted provider  without prior 
authorization.  
 
The Plan provides Medi-Cal members timely access to abortion services from any 
qualified provider without prior authorization. The Plan’s Member Handbook stated that 
if members are under 18 years of age, they can go to a doctor without permission from 
their parents or guardi an for family planning and abortion services.  
 
The doctor or clinic does not have to be part of the Plan’s network. The member can 
choose any Medi -Cal provider and go to them without a referral or  prior authorization for 
these services.  
 
The verification study revealed the Plan appropriately processed abortion service claims 
for payment. Based on the review of the Plan’s documents, there were no deficiencies 
noted for the audit period.   
 
Recommendation: None. 
 
