     
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION 
SAN DIEGO SECTION 
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
Kern Health Systems  
dba 
Kern Family Health Care  
 
2023  
 
 
Contract Number:  
  
03-76165  
 
                                Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit:     
Report Issued:  
 November 1, 202 2 
    through 
October 31, 2023  
 
November 27 , 2023  
    through 
December 8, 2023  
 
March 25, 2024  
 
   
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
    I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. 1 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  ................................................................. 2 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  ...................................................... 4 
 IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS 
 Category 6 – Administrative and Organizational Capacity  ............... 6 
     
 
 
1 of 7 I. INTRODUCTION  
  Kern Health Systems dba Kern Family Health Care (Plan) was established in 1993,  as a 
local initiative and operates as a Two- Plan Medi -Cal Managed Care Health Plan Model. 
The Plan began operating as a County Health Authority structure in January 1995. The Plan is a public agency, established by the Kern County Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors appoints a Board of Directors who serve as the governing body.   On May 2, 1996, the Plan obtained its Knox -Keene license from the California 
Department of Managed Health Care. The Plan serves all of Kern County with the exception of Ridgecrest.  
 Medi -Cal is the Plan’s single line of business. As of October  2023, the Plan served 
approximately 364,474 members . 
  
 
 
2 of 7 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  
  This report presents the audit findings of the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) medical audit for the period of November 1, 2022 , through October 31, 2023 .  
The audit was conducted from November 27 , 2023 , through December 8, 2023 . The 
audit consisted of document review, verification studies, and interviews with Plan representatives.  
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on February 27, 2024. The Plan was allowed 15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing the draft audit report findings. The Plan submitted a response after the Exit Conference. The results of the evaluation of the Plan’s response are reflected in this report.  
 The audit evaluated six categories of perfor mance: Utilization Management, Case 
Management  and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Member’s 
Rights, Quality Management , and Administrative and Organizational Capacity.  
 The prior DHCS medical audit issued on May 5, 2023, ( audit period November  1, 2021,  
through October  31, 2022 ) identified deficiencies, which were addressed in a Corrective 
Action Plan (CAP). The prior year CAP was open during the audit period. The audit 
examined documentation for compliance to determine the extent of the Plan’s CAP implementation.   
 The summary of findings by category follows:  
 Category 1 –  Utilization Management  
 No findings were noted for this audit period.   Category 2 –  Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 No findings were noted for this audit period.   Category 3 –  Access and Availability of Care  
 No findings were noted for this audit period.    
 
 
3 of 7  Category 4 –  Member’s Rights  
 No findings were noted for this audit period.   Category 5 –  Quality Management  
 No findings were noted for this audit period.  
  
Category 6 –  Administrative and Organizational Capacity 
 The Plan is required to refer any potential Fraud, Waste, or Abuse (FWA) identified and report to DHCS, the results of its preliminary investigation within ten working  days. The 
Plan did not report to DHCS the results of their preliminary investigations of potential FWA identified within ten working  days.   
  
 
 
4 of 7 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES  
  
SCOPE  
 The DHCS, Contract and Enrollment Review Division conducted this audit to ascertain that the medical services provided to Plan members complied with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and the state Contract.  
 
PROCEDURE  
 The audit included a review of the Plan’s policies for providing services, the procedures used to implement the policies, and verification studies of the implementation and effectiveness of the policies. Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted with Plan administrators.  
 The following verification studies were conducted:  
 Category 1 – Utilization Management  
 Prior Authorization Appeal Procedures : 14 overturned and 21 upheld medical prior 
authorization appeals  including eight  Seniors and Persons with Disabilities ( SPD) cases 
were reviewed for appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care 
 Initial Health Appointment : 20 medical records  including 5 SPD member ’s medical 
records  were reviewed to confirm the performance and completeness of assessment.  
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 Claims: 15 emergency services and 26 family planning claims were reviewed for 
appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 Grievance Procedures: 20 Quality of Service, 25 Q uality of Care, 5 expedited, and 10 
exempt grievance cases were reviewed for timely resolution, appropriate response to 
complainant, and submission to the appropriate level for review. Ten  member calls from 
inquiry logs were reviewed for appropriate classification and processing.  
      
 
 
5 of 7 Category 6 –  Administrative and Organizational Capacity 
 Fraud and Abuse Reporting : 15 fraud and abuse cases were reviewed for proper 
reporting of suspected FWA  to DHCS within the required time frame.  
 Encounter Data:  Five encounter data records were reviewed for complete, accurate, 
reasonable, and timely encounter data submissions.  
 A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report.
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN:   Kern Health Systems dba Kern Family Health Care 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  November 1, 2022, through October 31, 2023  
DATES OF AUDIT:  November 27 , 2023, through December 8 , 202 3 
 
 
6 of 7 CATEGORY 6 – ADMINISTRATIVE AND ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY  
  
6.2  
FRAUD AND ABUSE  
 6.2.1 Fraud and Abuse Reporting 
 The Plan shall make prompt referral of any potential FWA  that it identifies to the DHCS 
Audits and Investigations Intake Unit. The Plan shall conduct, complete, and report to DHCS, the results of a preliminary investigation of the suspected FWA  within ten 
working  days of the Plan first becoming aware of, or is on notice of, such activity. 
(Contract Exhibit E, Attachment 2, Provision 26(B)(7) ) 
 Plan policy 14.04- P, Prevention, Detection, and Reporting of Fraud, Waste, or Abuse 
(revised December 2022),  states the Plan will refer all suspected FWA  it identified in a 
preliminary report to the DHCS Program Integrity Unit (PIU) with in ten working  days 
from the date of discovery o r when the Plan is notified of such activity. In addition, the 
policy states that Plan employees who identify or receive reports of potential FWA  
should report it to the Compliance Department within two- working -days of internal 
identification or  receiving the report.  
 According to the Plan’s policy, 14.04- P, suspicious activities may be reported by phone, 
in writing, or in person to the Compliance Department. The Compliance Department’s contact information is available on the Plan’s website, M ember Handbook, and P rovider 
Manual. An Internal FWA Referral form is also available for staff to report allegations to 
the Compliance Department via an internal communication system, email, or fax.  
 Finding: The Plan did not report potential FWA  to DHCS within ten  working  days.   
 During the audit period, the Plan received 108 potential FWA allegations; however, it did not adhere to its policy to report these to DHCS within the required timeframes . A 
verification study of 15 potential FWA  cases r evealed that 2 cases were reported to 
DHCS between 20 and 27 working days after the Plan first became aware of the 
activity.   The audit found that the Member Services  and Grievances  Department s received 
potential FWA allegations and coordinated an exchange of information to the Plan’s Compliance Department. However, a delay from the Member Services  and Grievances  
Departments to the Compliance Department contributed to untimely reporting to the 
DHCS.  
 
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN:  Kern Health Systems dba Kern Family Health Care 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  November 1, 2022 , through October 31, 2023  
DATES  OF AUDIT:  November 27 , 2023 , through December 8 , 202 3 
 
 
7 of 7 Failure to promptly  refer potential FWA  to DHCS may compromise the integrity of the 
Plan and the Medi -Cal program.  
 Recommendation:  Report potential FWA  to the DHCS PIU within ten  working  days 
from the date of discovery or when the Plan is notified of such activity.  
 
       
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS 
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW DIVISION 
SAN DIEGO  SECTION 
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
Kern Health Systems  
dba  
Kern Family Health Care  
 
2023  
 
Contract Number:   
  
03-75798 and 22- 20467 
State Supported Services  
 
Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit:     
Report Issued:  
 November  1, 202 2 
    through 
Octob er 31 , 2023  
 
November 27, 2023  
    through 
December 8, 2023  
 March 25, 2024  
   
 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
    I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. 1 
 Il. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ................................................... 2 
   
 1 of 2 I. INTRODUCTION  
   This report presents the audit findings of Kern Health Systems dba Kern Family Health 
Care  (Plan)  State Supported Services C ontract Numbers  03-75798 and 22- 20467. The 
State Supported Services C ontract  cover s abortion services for  the Plan . 
 The audit  was conducted from November 27, 2023,  through December 8, 2023,  for the 
audit period of November 1, 2022,  through October 31, 2023.  The audit consisted of  
document review s, verification study, and interviews with Plan  staff.  
 The audit reviewed 15  service claims for appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 An Exit Conference with the Plan was held on February 27, 2024 . The Plan was allowed 
15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplemental information addressing the draft audit report findings. The Plan submitted a response after the Exit  
Conference. The results of the evaluation of the Plan’ s response are reflected in this  
report.  
  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
 
PLAN: Kern Health Systems  dba Kern Family Health Care 
 
AUDIT PERIOD: November  1, 2022 , through Octob er 31 , 2023  
DATES  OF AUDIT: November 27, 2023 , through December 8, 202 3 
 
 2 of 2 STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES  
 The Plan is required to provide, or arrange to provide, to eligible members the  
following State Supported Services: Current Procedural Coding System Codes 59840  
through 59857 and Health Care Finance Administration Common Procedure Coding  System Codes X1516, X1518, X7724, X7726, and Z0336. These codes are subject to  change upon the Department of Health Care Services implementation of the Health  Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 electronic transaction and code  sets provisions. Such changes shall not require an amendment to this Contract.  (State 
Supported Services Contract, Exhibit A( 4)) 
 The Plan’s policy , 3.21-P, Family Planning Services  (revised August 31, 2023 ), states 
that members may  access abortion services from the provider of their choice without 
prior authorization.  The Plan defines abortion services as a “sensitive service” and 
assures members’ confidentiality and accessibility.  Prior authorization is required if the 
member has r equested inpatient hospitalization for the performance of an abortion.  
 The Member Handbook informs members that some providers may have a moral objection to abortion and have a right not to offer this  service. However, members can 
contact the Plan  for assistance. Members are also informed that referrals or prior 
authorization are not needed from primary care physicians  for abortion and abortion-
related services.   
 The Provider Manual informs providers of the members’ freedom of choice in obtaining sensitive services, such as abortion services, without prior authorization.   The audit found no discrepancies in this section.  
 Recommendation:  None.  
