       
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT  REVIEW – SACRAMENTO  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES 
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
FRESNO -KING -MADERA REGIONAL HEALTH 
AUTHORITY  
DBA CALVIVA HEALTH 
 
2023 
 
Contract Number:  
  
10-87050 
 
Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit :    
Report Issued:  
 April 1, 2022  
    Through 
March 31, 2023 
 
April 17, 2023 
    Through 
April 28, 2023  September 18 , 2023 
 
   
    
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
    I. INTRODUCTION  ................................................................................. 1 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  .................................................................... 2 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES ......................................................... 3 
 IV. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS  
  Category 4 – Member’s Rights  ........................................................... 5 
    
 1 of 6 
 I. INTRODUCTION 
  Fresno-Kings -Madera Regional Health Authority  (RHA) was established in 2009 as the 
Local Initiative Health Plan for a three-county region of Fresno, Kings, and Madera. The RHA operates as CalViva Health (Plan). The Plan is governed by a 17-member  
commission, comprised of local physicians, county supervisors, Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHC), local hospitals, and stakeholders from all three counties. The Plan started enrolling Medi -Cal beneficiaries from all three counties on March 1, 2011.  
 The Plan has a contractual relationship with a delegated entity, which inc ludes an 
Administrative Services Agreement (ASA) and a Capitated Provider Services Agreement (CPSA). The delegated  entity is contracted to provide services on the Plan’s 
behalf.  
 In accordance with the ASA, the delegated entity maintains the systems for the Plan’s 
operations and performs administrative activities on behalf of the Plan. The responsibilities delegated to the entity include utilization management, case management, credentialing and re-credentialing, clinical and non-clinical memb er 
grievances and appeals, quality improvement, and quality management functions.  
 Through the CPSA, the Plan provides member health care services primarily through a subcontracted network of primary care providers,  specialists, behavioral health 
provider s, hospitals, ancillary providers, pharmacies, and directly contracted FQHC.  
 As of December 2022, the Plan served 418,048 Medi -Cal members: 336,359 in Fresno 
County, 45,484 in Madera County, and 36,205 in Kings County. The Plan’s Medi -Cal 
composition is 63 percent Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, 27 percent Medi -
Cal Expansion, 6 percent Seniors and Persons with Disabilities, 4 percent Dual eligible, 
and less than one percent for all other s.   
 2 of 6 
 II. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 This report presents the audit findings of the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) medical audit for the period of April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023. The audit was conducted from April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023. The audit consisted of document review, verification studies, and interviews with Plan and delegated entity representatives.  
 An Exit Conference was held with the Plan on August 24, 2023. The Plan was allowed 
15 calendar days from the date of the Exit Conference to provide supplement al 
information addressing the draft audit report findings. The findings in the report reflect the evaluation of all relevant information received prior and subsequent to the Exit Conference.  
 The reduced scope audit evaluated f our categories of performance: Case Management 
and Coordination of Care, Access and Availability of Care, Member’s Rights, and Quality Management.  
 The prior DHCS medical audit for the period April 1, 2020 through March 31, 2022 , was 
issued on November 17, 2 022. This audit examined documentation for compliance and 
determined to what extent the Plan has implemented their Corrective Action Plan.  
 The summary of the findings by category follows:  
 Category 2 – Case Management and Coordination of Care  
 There were no findings in this category.  
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 There were no findings in this category.  
 Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 The Plan is required to establish, implement, maintain, and oversee a grievance system to ensure the receipt, review, and resolution of grievances.
 The Plan did not classify, 
process, review , or resolve all expressions of dissatisfaction as grievances . 
 Category 5 – Quality Management  
 There were no findings in this category.  
     
 3 of 6 
 III. SCOPE/AUDIT PROCEDURES 
  
SCOPE 
 This audit was conducted by the DHCS Contract and Enrollment Review Division to ascertain that the medical services provided to Plan members complied with federal and state laws, Medi -Cal regulations and guidelines, and the State Contract.  
 
PROCEDURE  
 The audit was conducted from April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023. The audit included the review of the Plan’s policies for providing services, the procedures used to 
implement the policies, and the verification studies of the implementation and 
effectiveness of the policies. Documents were reviewed and interviews were conducted with the Plan administrators, staff, and delegated entity.  
 The following verification studies were conducted:  
 Category 2 – Case M anagement and Coordination of Care  
 Health Risk Assessment (HRA): 17 member files were reviewed to confirm coordination 
of care and fulfillment of HRA requirements.  
 Initial Health Assessment: 20 member  files were reviewed to confirm the performance of 
the assessment.  
 Behavioral Health Treatment: Ten member  files were reviewed to confirm services were 
provided and covered, or arranged, as appropriate, in a timely manner.  
 Category 3 – Access and Availability of Care  
 Claims: 25 emergency services and 25 family planning claims were reviewed for appropriate and timely adjudication.  
 Transportation Access Standards: 15 Non-Emergency Medical Transportation (NEMT) and 15 Non-Medical Transportation (NMT) files were reviewed to confirm compliance 
with the NEMT and NMT requirements.  
 Category 4 – Member’s Rights  
 Grievances: 60 standard grievances, 15 exempt grievances, five expedited grievances, and 20 call inquiries were reviewed for timely resolution, appropriate classification, 
response to complainant, and submission to the appropriate level of review. The 60 standard grievance cases included 38 quality of care grievances and 22 quality of service grievances.  
 4 of 6 
 A description of the findings for each category is contained in the following report.
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN: Fresno-King-Madera Regional Health Authority dba CalViva Health  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  April 1, 2022 thr ough March 31, 2023 
DATE S OF AUDIT:  April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023    
 
 5 of 6 
  
 
CATEGORY 4 – MEMBER’S RIGHTS  
 
 
4.1  
GRIEVANCE SYSTEM  
 4.1.1 Classification of Grievances  The Plan is required to establish, implement, maintain, and oversee a grievance and 
appeal system to ensure the receipt, review, and resolution of grievances and appeals. The grievance and appeal system must operate in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws.  A grievance is an expression of dissatisfaction about any matter 
other than an adverse benefit determination. An inquiry is a request for information that does not include an expression of dissatisfaction. A complaint is the same as a grievance. If the Plan is unable to distinguish between a grievance and an inquiry, it must be considered a gri evance.  (All Plan Letter 21-011, VII ) 
 The Plan is required to implement and maintain procedures to monitor the member’s 
grievance system and ensure that the grievance submitted is reported to an appropriate 
level. ( Contract 10-87050 A01, Exhibit A, Attachment 14 (2)(C))  
 Plan policy , #AG-001 Member Grievance Process , indicated if the Plan is unable to 
distinguish between a grievance and an inquiry, it shall be considered a grievance. A 
member does not need to use the term “grievance” for a complaint to be captured as an 
expression of dissatisfaction and processed as a grievance by the Plan.  
 Finding: The Plan did not classify, process, review , or resolve all expressions of 
dissatisfaction as grievances.  
 A verification study revealed that the Plan’s delegate did not classify four of 22 inquiry 
calls as a grievance. All four calls contained an expression of dissatisfaction. A written 
narrative was provided in an additional document request to explain the Plan’s 
response:   
• In three of four inquiry calls, the Plan concurred that the calls  should have been 
classified as a grievance after internal review of the inquiry calls.  
• In one of four inquiry calls, the member expressed concern about a balance 
billing issue and the Plan indicated this was not an expression of dissatisfaction.  However, the request for information involved an expression of dissatisfaction with an unwarranted bill.  
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN: Fresno-King-Madera Regional Health Authority dba CalViva Health  
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DATE S OF AUDIT:  April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023    
 
 6 of 6 
 The Plan provided a written response stating that it did not classify the three inquiries as 
grievances due to an error in judgement by the member services representatives and would provide additional training and coaching to those representatives.    
 When the Plan does not ensure that all expressions of dissatisfaction are classified as 
grievances , member grievances cannot be addressed or resolved in a timely manner.  
 Recommendation:  Revise policies and procedures to monitor inquiry calls and ensure 
all member  expressions of dissatisfaction are classified, processed, reviewed, and 
resolved as grievances.  
     
       
CONTRACT AND ENROLLMENT REVIEW  – SACRAMENTO  
AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS  
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES 
  
REPORT ON THE MEDICAL AUDIT OF  
FRESNO -KING -MADERA REGIONAL HEALTH 
AUTHORITY  
DBA CALVIVA HEALTH 
 
2023 
 
 
Contract Number:   
  
22-20470 State Supported Services  
Audit Period:  
   
Dates of Audit :    
Report Issued:  
 April 1, 2022  
    Through 
March 31, 2023 
 
April 17, 2023 
    Through 
April 28, 2023  September 18 , 2023 
 
   
    
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
    I. INTRODUCTION  ................................................................................. 1 
 Il. COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS ...................................................... 2 
   
1 of 2 
 I. INTRODUCTION 
 This report presents the audit findings of Fresno-Kings -Madera Regional Health Authority 
dba CalViva Health (Plan) State Supported Services Contract No. 10-87054. The State 
Supported Services Contract covers abortion services with the Plan.  
 The audit was conducted from April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023. The audit period was April 1 , 2022 through March 31, 2023. The audit consisted of document review of 
materials supplied by the Plan, a verification study, and interviews.  
 Twenty -five State Supported Services claims were reviewed for appropriate and timely 
adjudication.  
    
  COMPLIANCE AUDIT FINDINGS (CAF)  
 
PLAN: Fresno-King-Madera Regional Health Authority dba CalViva Health 
 
AUDIT PERIOD:  April 1, 2022 through March 31, 2023 
DAT ES OF AUDIT:  April 17, 2023 through April 28, 2023    
 
2 of 2 
  
STATE SUPPORTED SERVICES 
 SUMMARY OF FINDING (S): The Plan outlines their processes and procedures for the 
consistent and accurate processing of sensitive service claims through the policies and procedures, Provider Communications, and Member Handbook. Abortion services are covered for Plan members and do not require prior authorization. However, if there is a 
hospital overnight stay required for the service performed, it is considered separate, and the member will need to have prior authorization.  
 No findings  were noted in the verification study conduct ed to determine appropriate and 
timely adjudication of State Supported Services claims.  
  RECOMMENDATION(S): None.  
     
